joseph heller catch-22 the island of pianosa lie in the mediterranean sea eight mile south of elba . it is veri small and obvious could not accommod all of the action describ . like the set of thi novel , the charact , too , are fictiti . to my mother and to shirley , and my children , erica and ted 1 the texan it wa love at first sight . the first time yossarian saw the chaplain he fell madli in love with him . yossarian wa in the hospit with a pain in hi liver that fell just short of be jaundic . the doctor were puzzl by the fact that it wasn ’ t quit jaundic . if it becam jaundic they could treat it . if it didn ’ t becom jaundic and went away they could discharg him . but thi just be short of jaundic all the time confus them . each morn they came around , three brisk and seriou men with effici mouth and ineffici eye , accompani by brisk and seriou nurs duckett , one of the ward nurs who didn ’ t like yossarian . they read the chart at the foot of the bed and ask impati about the pain . they seem irrit when he told them it wa exactli the same . “ still no movement ? ” the full colonel demand . the doctor exchang a look when he shook hi head . “ give him anoth pill. ” nurs duckett made a note to give yossarian anoth pill , and the four of them move along to the next bed . none of the nurs like yossarian . actual , the pain in hi liver had gone away , but yossarian didn ’ t say anyth and the doctor never suspect . they just suspect that he had been move hi bowel and not tell anyon . yossarian had everyth he want in the hospit . the food wasn ’ t too bad , and hi meal were brought to him in bed . there were extra ration of fresh meat , and dure the hot part of the afternoon he and the other were serv chill fruit juic or chill chocol milk . apart from the doctor and the nurs , no one ever disturb him . for a littl while in the morn he had to censor letter , but he wa free after that to spend the rest of each day lie around idli with a clear conscienc . he wa comfort in the hospit , and it wa easi to stay on becaus he alway ran a temperatur of 101 . he wa even more comfort than dunbar , who had to keep fall down on hi face in order to get hi meal brought to him in bed . after he had made up hi mind to spend the rest of the war in the hospit , yossarian wrote letter to everyon he knew say that he wa in the hospit but never mention whi . one day he had a better idea . to everyon he knew he wrote that he wa go on a veri danger mission . “ they ask for volunt . it ’ s veri danger , but someon ha to do it . i ’ ll write you the instant i get back. ” and he had not written anyon sinc . all the offic patient in the ward were forc to censor letter written by all the enlisted-men patient , who were kept in resid in ward of their own . it wa a monoton job , and yossarian wa disappoint to learn that the live of enlist men were onli slightli more interest than the live of offic . after the first day he had no curios at all . to break the monotoni he invent game . death to all modifi , he declar one day , and out of everi letter that pass through hi hand went everi adverb and everi adject . the next day he made war on articl . he reach a much higher plane of creativ the follow day when he black out everyth in the letter but a , an and the . that erect more dynam intralinear tension , he felt , and in just about everi case left a messag far more univers . soon he wa proscrib part of salut and signatur and leav the text untouch . one time he black out all but the salut “ dear mari ” from a letter , and at the bottom he wrote , “ i yearn for you tragic . r. o. shipman , chaplain , u.s. army. ” r. o. shipman wa the group chaplain ’ s name . when he had exhaust all possibl in the letter , he began attack the name and address on the envelop , obliter whole home and street , annihil entir metropolis with careless flick of hi wrist as though he were god . catch-22 requir that each censor letter bear the censor offic ’ s name . most letter he didn ’ t read at all . on those he didn ’ t read at all he wrote hi own name . on those he did read he wrote , “ washington irving. ” when that grew monoton he wrote , “ irv washington. ” censor the envelop had seriou repercuss , produc a rippl of anxieti on some ether militari echelon that float a c.i.d . man back into the ward pose as a patient . they all knew he wa a c.i.d . man becaus he kept inquir about an offic name irv or washington and becaus after hi first day there he wouldn ’ t censor letter . he found them too monoton . it wa a good ward thi time , one of the best he and dunbar had ever enjoy . with them thi time wa the twenty-four-year-old fighter-pilot captain with the spars golden mustach who had been shot into the adriat sea in midwint and not even caught cold . now the summer wa upon them , the captain had not been shot down , and he said he had the gripp . in the bed on yossarian ’ s right , still lie amor on hi belli , wa the startl captain with malaria in hi blood and a mosquito bite on hi ass . across the aisl from yossarian wa dunbar , and next to dunbar wa the artilleri captain with whom yossarian had stop play chess . the captain wa a good chess player , and the game were alway interest . yossarian had stop play chess with him becaus the game were so interest they were foolish . then there wa the educ texan from texa who look like someon in technicolor and felt , patriot , that peopl of means-dec folk-should be given more vote than drifter , whore , crimin , degener , atheist and indec folk-peopl without mean . yossarian wa unspring rhythm in the letter the day they brought the texan in . it wa anoth quiet , hot , untroubl day . the heat press heavili on the roof , stifl sound . dunbar wa lie motionless on hi back again with hi eye stare up at the ceil like a doll ’ s . he wa work hard at increas hi life span . he did it by cultiv boredom . dunbar wa work so hard at increas hi life span that yossarian thought he wa dead . they put the texan in a bed in the middl of the ward , and it wasn ’ t long befor he donat hi view . dunbar sat up like a shot . “ that ’ s it , ” he cri excitedli . “ there wa someth missing-al the time i knew there wa someth missing-and now i know what it is. ” he bang hi fist down into hi palm . “ no patriot , ” he declar . “ you ’ re right , ” yossarian shout back . “ you ’ re right , you ’ re right , you ’ re right . the hot dog , the brooklyn dodger . mom ’ s appl pie . that ’ s what everyon ’ s fight for . but who ’ s fight for the decent folk ? who ’ s fight for more vote for the decent folk ? there ’ s no patriot , that ’ s what it is . and no matriot , either. ” the warrant offic on yossarian ’ s left wa unimpress . “ who give a shit ? ” he ask tiredli , and turn over on hi side to go to sleep . the texan turn out to be good-natur , gener and likabl . in three day no one could stand him . he sent shudder of annoy scamper up ticklish spine , and everybodi fled from him-everybodi but the soldier in white , who had no choic . the soldier in white wa encas from head to toe in plaster and gauz . he had two useless leg and two useless arm . he had been smuggl into the ward dure the night , and the men had no idea he wa among them until they awok in the morn and saw the two strang leg hoist from the hip , the two strang arm anchor up perpendicularli , all four limb pinion strang in air by lead weight suspend darkli abov him that never move . sewn into the bandag over the insid of both elbow were zipper lip through which he wa fed clear fluid from a clear jar . a silent zinc pipe rose from the cement on hi groin and wa coupl to a slim rubber hose that carri wast from hi kidney and drip it effici into a clear , stopper jar on the floor . when the jar on the floor wa full , the jar feed hi elbow wa empti , and the two were simpli switch quickli so that the stuff could drip back into him . all they ever realli saw of the soldier in white wa a fray black hole over hi mouth . the soldier in white had been file next to the texan , and the texan sat sideway on hi own bed and talk to him throughout the morn , afternoon and even in a pleasant , sympathet drawl . the texan never mind that he got no repli . temperatur were taken twice a day in the ward . earli each morn and late each afternoon nurs cramer enter with a jar full of thermomet and work her way up one side of the ward and down the other , distribut a thermomet to each patient . she manag the soldier in white by insert a thermomet into the hole over hi mouth and leav it balanc there on the lower rim . when she return to the man in the first bed , she took hi thermomet and record hi temperatur , and then move on to the next bed and continu around the ward again . one afternoon when she had complet her first circuit of the ward and came a second time to the soldier in white , she read hi thermomet and discov that he wa dead . “ murder , ” dunbar said quietli . the texan look up at him with an uncertain grin . “ killer , ” yossarian said . what are you fella talkin ” about ? ” the texan ask nervous . “ you murder him , ” said dunbar . “ you kill him , ” said yossarian . the texan shrank back . “ you fella are crazi . i didn ’ t even touch him. ” “ you murder him , ” said dunbar . “ i heard you kill him , ” said yossarian . “ you kill him becaus he wa a nigger , ” dunbar said . “ you fella are crazi , ” the texan cri . “ they don ’ t allow nigger in here . they got a special place for niggers. ” “ the sergeant smuggl him in , ” dunbar said . “ the communist sergeant , ” said yossarian . “ and you knew it. ” the warrant offic on yossarian ’ s left wa unimpress by the entir incid of the soldier in white . the warrant offic wa unimpress by everyth and never spoke at all unless it wa to show irrit . the day befor yossarian met the chaplain , a stove explod in the mess hall and set fire to one side of the kitchen . an intens heat flash through the area . even in yossarian ’ s ward , almost three hundr feet away , they could hear the roar of the blaze and the sharp crack of flame timber . smoke sped past the orange-tint window . in about fifteen minut the crash truck from the airfield arriv to fight the fire . for a frantic half hour it wa touch and go . then the firemen began to get the upper hand . suddenli there wa the monoton old drone of bomber return from a mission , and the firemen had to roll up their hose and speed back to the field in case one of the plane crash and caught fire . the plane land safe . as soon as the last one wa down , the firemen wheel their truck around and race back up the hill to resum their fight with the fire at the hospit . when they got there , the blaze wa out . it had die of it own accord , expir complet without even an ember to be water down , and there wa noth for the disappoint firemen to do but drink tepid coffe and hang around tri to screw the nurs . the chaplain arriv the day after the fire . yossarian wa busi expurg all but romanc word from the letter when the chaplain sat down in a chair between the bed and ask him how he wa feel . he had place himself a bit to one side , and the captain ’ s bar on the tab of hi shirt collar were all the insignia yossarian could see . yossarian had no idea who he wa and just took it for grant that he wa either anoth doctor or anoth madman . “ oh , pretti good , ” he answer . “ i ’ ve got a slight pain in my liver and i haven ’ t been the most regular of fellow , i guess , but all in all i must admit that i feel pretti good. ” “ that ’ s good , ” said the chaplain . “ ye , ” yossarian said . “ ye , that is good. ” “ i meant to come around sooner , ” the chaplain said , “ but i realli haven ’ t been well. ” “ that ’ s too bad , ” yossarian said . “ just a head cold , ” the chaplain ad quickli . “ i ’ ve got a fever of a hundr and one , ” yossarian ad just as quickli . “ that ’ s too bad , ” said the chaplain . “ ye , ” yossarian agre . “ ye , that is too bad. ” the chaplain fidget . “ is there anyth i can do for you ? ” he ask after a while . “ no , no. ” yossarian sigh . “ the doctor are do all that ’ s humanli possibl , i suppose. ” “ no , no. ” the chaplain color faintli . “ i didn ’ t mean anyth like that . i meant cigarettes… or books… or… toys. ” “ no , no , ” yossarian said . “ thank you . i have everyth i need , i suppose-everyth but good health. ” “ that ’ s too bad. ” “ ye , ” yossarian said . “ ye , that is too bad. ” the chaplain stir again . he look from side to side a few time , then gaze up at the ceil , then down at the floor . he drew a deep breath . “ lieuten nate send hi regard , ” he said . yossarian wa sorri to hear they had a mutual friend . it seem there wa a basi to their convers after all . “ you know lieuten nate ? ” he ask regret . “ ye , i know lieuten nate quit well. ” “ he ’ s a bit looni , isn ’ t he ? ” the chaplain ’ s smile wa embarrass . “ i ’ m afraid i couldn ’ t say . i don ’ t think i know him that well. ” “ you can take my word for it , ” yossarian said . “ he ’ s as goofi as they come. ” the chaplain weigh the next silenc heavili and then shatter it with an abrupt question . “ you are captain yossarian , aren ’ t you ? ” “ nate had a bad start . he came from a good family. ” “ pleas excus me , ” the chaplain persist timor . “ i may be commit a veri grave error . are you captain yossarian ? ” “ ye , ” captain yossarian confess . “ i am captain yossarian. ” “ of the 256th squadron ? ” “ of the fight 256th squadron , ” yossarian repli . “ i didn ’ t know there were ani other captain yossarian . as far as i know , i ’ m the onli captain yossarian i know , but that ’ s onli as far as i know. ” “ i see , ” the chaplain said unhappili . “ that ’ s two to the fight eighth power , ” yossarian point out , “ if you ’ re think of write a symbol poem about our squadron. ” “ no , ” mumbl the chaplain . “ i ’ m not think of write a symbol poem about your squadron. ” yossarian straighten sharpli when he spi the tini silver cross on the other side of the chaplain ’ s collar . he wa thoroughli astonish , for he had never realli talk with a chaplain befor . “ you ’ re a chaplain , ” he exclaim ecstat . “ i didn ’ t know you were a chaplain. ” “ whi , ye , ” the chaplain answer . “ didn ’ t you know i wa a chaplain ? ” “ whi , no . i didn ’ t know you were a chaplain. ” yossarian stare at him with a big , fascin grin . “ i ’ ve never realli seen a chaplain before. ” the chaplain flush again and gaze down at hi hand . he wa a slight man of about thirty-two with tan hair and brown diffid eye . hi face wa narrow and rather pale . an innoc nest of ancient pimpl prick lay in the basin of each cheek . yossarian want to help him . “ can i do anyth at all to help you ? ” the chaplain ask . yossarian shook hi head , still grin . “ no , i ’ m sorri . i have everyth i need and i ’ m quit comfort . in fact , i ’ m not even sick. ” “ that ’ s good. ” as soon as the chaplain said the word , he wa sorri and shove hi knuckl into hi mouth with a giggl of alarm , but yossarian remain silent and disappoint him . “ there are other men in the group i must visit , ” he apolog final . “ i ’ ll come to see you again , probabl tomorrow. ” “ pleas do that , ” yossarian said . “ i ’ ll come onli if you want me to , ” the chaplain said , lower hi head shyli . “ i ’ ve notic that i make mani of the men uncomfortable. ” yossarian glow with affect . “ i want you to , ” he said . “ you won ’ t make me uncomfortable. ” the chaplain beam grate and then peer down at a slip of paper he had been conceal in hi hand all the while . he count along the bed in the ward , move hi lip , and then center hi attent dubious on dunbar . “ may i inquir , ” he whisper softli , “ if that is lieuten dunbar ? ” “ ye , ” yossarian answer loudli , “ that is lieuten dunbar. ” “ thank you , ” the chaplain whisper . “ thank you veri much . i must visit with him . i must visit with everi member of the group who is in the hospital. ” “ even those in other ward ? ” yossarian ask . “ even those in other wards. ” “ be care in those other ward , father , ” yossarian warn . “ that ’ s where they keep the mental case . they ’ re fill with lunatics. ” “ it isn ’ t necessari to call me father , ” the chaplain explain . “ i ’ m an anabaptist. ” “ i ’ m dead seriou about those other ward , ” yossarian continu grimli . “ m.p. won ’ t protect you , becaus they ’ re craziest of all . i ’ d go with you myself , but i ’ m scare stiff : insan is contagi . thi is the onli sane ward in the whole hospit . everybodi is crazi but us . thi is probabl the onli sane ward in the whole world , for that matter. ” the chaplain rose quickli and edg away from yossarian ’ s bed , and then nod with a concili smile and promis to conduct himself with appropri caution . “ and now i must visit with lieuten dunbar , ” he said . still he linger , remors . “ how is lieuten dunbar ? ” he ask at last . “ as good as they go , ” yossarian assur him . “ a true princ . one of the finest , least dedic men in the whole world. ” “ i didn ’ t mean that , ” the chaplain answer , whisper again . “ is he veri sick ? ” “ no , he isn ’ t veri sick . in fact , he isn ’ t sick at all. ” “ that ’ s good. ” the chaplain sigh with relief . “ ye , ” yossarian said . “ ye , that is good. ” “ a chaplain , ” dunbar said when the chaplain had visit him and gone . “ did you see that ? a chaplain. ” “ wasn ’ t he sweet ? ” said yossarian . “ mayb they should give him three votes. ” “ who ’ s they ? ” dunbar demand suspici . in a bed in the small privat section at the end of the ward , alway work ceaselessli behind the green plyboard partit , wa the solemn middle-ag colonel who wa visit everi day by a gentl , sweet-fac woman with curli ash-blond hair who wa not a nurs and not a wac and not a red cross girl but who nevertheless appear faith at the hospit in pianosa each afternoon wear pretti pastel summer dress that were veri smart and white leather pump with heel half high at the base of nylon seam that were inevit straight . the colonel wa in commun , and he wa kept busi day and night transmit glutin messag from the interior into squar pad of gauz which he seal meticul and deliv to a cover white pail that stood on the night tabl besid hi bed . the colonel wa gorgeou . he had a cavern mouth , cavern cheek , cavern , sad , mildew eye . hi face wa the color of cloud silver . he cough quietli , gingerli , and dab the pad slowli at hi lip with a distast that had becom automat . the colonel dwelt in a vortex of specialist who were still special in tri to determin what wa troubl him . they hurl light in hi eye to see if he could see , ram needl into nerv to hear if he could feel . there wa a urologist for hi urin , a lymphologist for hi lymph , an endocrinologist for hi endocrin , a psychologist for hi psych , a dermatologist for hi derma ; there wa a pathologist for hi patho , a cystologist for hi cyst , and a bald and pedant cetologist from the zoolog depart at harvard who had been shanghai ruthlessli into the medic corp by a faulti anod in an i.b.m . machin and spent hi session with the die colonel tri to discuss mobi dick with him . the colonel had realli been investig . there wa not an organ of hi bodi that had not been drug and derog , dust and dredg , finger and photograph , remov , plunder and replac . neat , slender and erect , the woman touch him often as she sat by hi bedsid and wa the epitom of state sorrow each time she smile . the colonel wa tall , thin and stoop . when he rose to walk , he bent forward even more , make a deep caviti of hi bodi , and place hi feet down veri care , move ahead by inch from the knee down . there were violet pool under hi eye . the woman spoke softli , softer than the colonel cough , and none of the men in the ward ever heard her voic . in less than ten day the texan clear the ward . the artilleri captain broke first , and after that the exodu start . dunbar , yossarian and the fighter captain all bolt the same morn . dunbar stop have dizzi spell , and the fighter captain blew hi nose . yossarian told the doctor that the pain in hi liver had gone away . it wa as easi as that . even the warrant offic fled . in less than ten day , the texan drove everybodi in the ward back to duty-everybodi but the c.i.d . man , who had caught cold from the fighter captain and come down with pneumonia . 2 cleving in a way the c.i.d . man wa pretti lucki , becaus outsid the hospit the war wa still go on . men went mad and were reward with medal . all over the world , boy on everi side of the bomb line were lay down their live for what they had been told wa their countri , and no one seem to mind , least of all the boy who were lay down their young live . there wa no end in sight . the onli end in sight wa yossarian ’ s own , and he might have remain in the hospit until doomsday had it not been for that patriot texan with hi infundibuliform jowl and hi lumpi , rumplehead , indestruct smile crack forev across the front of hi face like the brim of a black ten-gallon hat . the texan want everybodi in the ward to be happi but yossarian and dunbar . he wa realli veri sick . but yossarian couldn ’ t be happi , even though the texan didn ’ t want him to be , becaus outsid the hospit there wa still noth funni go on . the onli thing go on wa a war , and no one seem to notic but yossarian and dunbar . and when yossarian tri to remind peopl , they drew away from him and thought he wa crazi . even cleving , who should have known better but didn ’ t , had told him he wa crazi the last time they had seen each other , which wa just befor yossarian had fled into the hospit . cleving had stare at him with apoplect rage and indign and , claw the tabl with both hand , had shout , “ you ’ re crazi ! ” “ cleving , what do you want from peopl ? ” dunbar had repli wearili abov the nois of the offic ’ club . “ i ’ m not joke , ” cleving persist . “ they ’ re tri to kill me , ” yossarian told him calmli . “ no one ’ s tri to kill you , ” cleving cri . “ then whi are they shoot at me ? ” yossarian ask . “ they ’ re shoot at everyon , ” cleving answer . “ they ’ re tri to kill everyone. ” “ and what differ doe that make ? ” cleving wa alreadi on the way , half out of hi chair with emot , hi eye moist and hi lip quiver and pale . as alway occur when he quarrel over principl in which he believ passion , he would end up gasp furious for air and blink back bitter tear of convict . there were mani principl in which cleving believ passion . he wa crazi . “ who ’ s they ? ” he want to know . “ who , specif , do you think is tri to murder you ? ” “ everi one of them , ” yossarian told him . “ everi one of whom ? ” “ everi one of whom do you think ? ” “ i haven ’ t ani idea. ” “ then how do you know they aren ’ t ? ” “ because… ” cleving sputter , and turn speechless with frustrat . cleving realli thought he wa right , but yossarian had proof , becaus stranger he didn ’ t know shot at him with cannon everi time he flew up into the air to drop bomb on them , and it wasn ’ t funni at all . and if that wasn ’ t funni , there were lot of thing that weren ’ t even funnier . there wa noth funni about live like a bum in a tent in pianosa between fat mountain behind him and a placid blue sea in front that could gulp down a person with a cramp in the twinkl of an eye and ship him back to shore three day later , all charg paid , bloat , blue and putresc , water drain out through both cold nostril . the tent he live in stood right smack up against the wall of the shallow , dull-color forest separ hi own squadron from dunbar ’ s . immedi alongsid wa the abandon railroad ditch that carri the pipe that carri the aviat gasolin down to the fuel truck at the airfield . thank to orr , hi roommat , it wa the most luxuri tent in the squadron . each time yossarian return from one of hi holiday in the hospit or rest leav in rome , he wa surpris by some new comfort orr had instal in hi absence-run water , wood-burn fireplac , cement floor . yossarian had chosen the site , and he and orr had rais the tent togeth . orr , who wa a grin pygmi with pilot ’ s wing and thick , wavi brown hair part in the middl , furnish all the knowledg , while yossarian , who wa taller , stronger , broader and faster , did most of the work . just the two of them live there , although the tent wa big enough for six . when summer came , orr roll up the side flap to allow a breez that never blew to flush away the air bake insid . immedi next door to yossarian wa havermey , who like peanut brittl and live all by himself in the two-man tent in which he shot tini field mice everi night with huge bullet from the.45 he had stolen from the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent . on the other side of havermey stood the tent mcwatt no longer share with cleving , who had still not return when yossarian came out of the hospit . mcwatt share hi tent now with nate , who wa away in rome court the sleepi whore he had fallen so deepli in love with there who wa bore with her work and bore with him too . mcwatt wa crazi . he wa a pilot and flew hi plane as low as he dare over yossarian ’ s tent as often as he could , just to see how much he could frighten him , and love to go buzz with a wild , close roar over the wooden raft float on empti oil drum out past the sand bar at the immacul white beach where the men went swim nake . share a tent with a man who wa crazi wasn ’ t easi , but nate didn ’ t care . he wa crazi , too , and had gone everi free day to work on the offic ’ club that yossarian had not help build . actual , there were mani offic ’ club that yossarian had not help build , but he wa proudest of the one on pianosa . it wa a sturdi and complex monument to hi power of determin . yossarian never went there to help until it wa finish ; then he went there often , so pleas wa he with the larg , fine , rambl , shingl build . it wa truli a splendid structur , and yossarian throb with a mighti sens of accomplish each time he gaze at it and reflect that none of the work that had gone into it wa hi . there were four of them seat togeth at a tabl in the offic ’ club the last time he and cleving had call each other crazi . they were seat in back near the crap tabl on which applebi alway manag to win . applebi wa as good at shoot crap as he wa at play ping-pong , and he wa as good at play ping-pong as he wa at everyth els . everyth applebi did , he did well . applebi wa a fair-hair boy from iowa who believ in god , motherhood and the american way of life , without ever think about ani of them , and everybodi who knew him like him . “ i hate that son of a bitch , ” yossarian growl . the argument with cleving had begun a few minut earlier when yossarian had been unabl to find a machin gun . it wa a busi night . the bar wa busi , the crap tabl wa busi , the ping-gong tabl wa busi . the peopl yossarian want to machine-gun were busi at the bar sing sentiment old favorit that nobodi els ever tire of . instead of machine-gun them , he brought hi heel down hard on the ping-pong ball that came roll toward him off the paddl of one of the two offic play . “ that yossarian , ” the two offic laugh , shake their head , and got anoth ball from the box on the shelf . “ that yossarian , ” yossarian answer them . “ yossarian , ” nate whisper cautioningli . “ you see what i mean ? ” ask cleving . the offic laugh again when they heard yossarian mimick them . “ that yossarian , ” they said more loudli . “ that yossarian , ” yossarian echo . “ yossarian , pleas , ” nate plead . “ you see what i mean ? ” ask cleving . “ he ha antisoci aggressions. ” “ oh , shut up , ” dunbar told cleving . dunbar like cleving becaus cleving annoy him and made the time go slow . “ applebi isn ’ t even here , ” cleving point out triumphantli to yossarian . “ who said anyth about applebi ? ” yossarian want to know . “ colonel cathcart isn ’ t here , either. ” “ who said anyth about colonel cathcart ? ” “ what son of a bitch do you hate , then ? ” “ what son of a bitch is here ? ” “ i ’ m not go to argu with you , ” cleving decid . “ you don ’ t know who you hate. ” “ whoever ’ s tri to poison me , ” yossarian told him . “ nobodi ’ s tri to poison you. ” “ they poison my food twice , didn ’ t they ? didn ’ t they put poison in my food dure ferrara and dure the great big sieg of bologna ? ” “ they put poison in everybodi ’ s food , ” cleving explain . “ and what differ doe that make ? ” “ and it wasn ’ t even poison ! ” cleving cri heatedli , grow more emphat as he grew more confus . as far back as yossarian could recal , he explain to cleving with a patient smile , somebodi wa alway hatch a plot to kill him . there were peopl who care for him and peopl who didn ’ t , and those who didn ’ t hate him and were out to get him . they hate him becaus he wa assyrian . but they couldn ’ t touch him , he told cleving , becaus he had a sound mind in a pure bodi and wa as strong as an ox . they couldn ’ t touch him becaus he wa tarzan , mandrak , flash gordon . he wa bill shakespear . he wa cain , ulyss , the fli dutchman ; he wa lot in sodom , deirdr of the sorrow , sweeney in the nightingal among tree . he wa miracl ingredi z-247 . he was- “ crazi ! ” cleving interrupt , shriek . “ that ’ s what you are ! crazi ! ” “ -immens . i ’ m a real , slam-bang , honest-to-good , three-fist humding . i ’ m a bona fide supraman. ” “ superman ? ” cleving cri . “ superman ? ” “ supraman , ” yossarian correct . “ hey , fella , cut it out , ” nate beg with embarrass . “ everybodi ’ s look at us. ” “ you ’ re crazi , ” cleving shout vehement , hi eye fill with tear . “ you ’ ve got a jehovah complex. ” “ i think everyon is nathaniel. ” cleving arrest himself in mid-declam , suspici . “ who ’ s nathaniel ? ” “ nathaniel who ? ” inquir yossarian innoc . cleving skirt the trap neatli . “ you think everybodi is jehovah . you ’ re no better than raskolnkov- “ “ who ? ” “ -ye , raskolnikov , who- “ “ raskolnikov ! ” “ -who-i mean it-who felt he could justifi kill an old woman- “ “ no better than ? ” “ -ye , justifi , that ’ s right-with an ax ! and i can prove it to you ! ” gasp furious for air , cleving enumer yossarian ’ s symptom : an unreason belief that everybodi around him wa crazi , a homicid impuls to machine-gun stranger , retrospect falsif , an unfound suspicion that peopl hate him and were conspir to kill him . but yossarian knew he wa right , becaus , as he explain to cleving , to the best of hi knowledg he had never been wrong . everywher he look wa a nut , and it wa all a sensibl young gentleman like himself could do to maintain hi perspect amid so much mad . and it wa urgent that he did , for he knew hi life wa in peril . yossarian eye everyon he saw warili when he return to the squadron from the hospit . milo wa away , too , in smyrna for the fig harvest . the mess hall ran smoothli in milo ’ s absenc . yossarian had respond raven to the pungent aroma of spici lamb while he wa still in the cab of the ambul bounc down along the knot road that lay like a broken suspend between the hospit and the squadron . there wa shish-kabob for lunch , huge , savori hunk of spit meat sizzl like the devil over charcoal after marin seventy-two hour in a secret mixtur milo had stolen from a crook trader in the levant , serv with iranian rice and asparagu tip parmesan , follow by cherri jubile for dessert and then steam cup of fresh coffe with benedictin and brandi . the meal wa serv in enorm help on damask tablecloth by the skill italian waiter major -- de coverley had kidnap from the mainland and given to milo . yossarian gorg himself in the mess hall until he thought he would explod and then sag back in a content stupor , hi mouth filmi with a succul residu . none of the offic in the squadron had ever eaten so well as they ate regularli in milo ’ s mess hall , and yossarian wonder awhil if it wasn ’ t perhap all worth it . but then he burp and rememb that they were tri to kill him , and he sprint out of the mess hall wildli and ran look for doc daneeka to have himself taken off combat duti and sent home . he found doc daneeka in sunlight , sit on a high stool outsid hi tent . “ fifti mission , ” doc daneeka told him , shake hi head . “ the colonel want fifti missions. ” “ but i ’ ve onli got forty-four ! ” doc daneeka wa unmov . he wa a sad , birdlik man with the spatul face and scrub , taper featur of a well-groom rat . “ fifti mission , ” he repeat , still shake hi head . “ the colonel want fifti missions. ” 3 havermey actual , no one wa around when yossarian return from the hospit but orr and the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent . the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent wa a pest , and yossarian didn ’ t like him , even though he had never seen him . have him lie around all day annoy yossarian so much that he had gone to the orderli room sever time to complain to sergeant towser , who refus to admit that the dead man even exist , which , of cours , he no longer did . it wa still more frustrat to tri to appeal directli to major major , the long and boni squadron command , who look a littl bit like henri fonda in distress and went jump out the window of hi offic each time yossarian bulli hi way past sergeant towser to speak to him about it . the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent wa simpli not easi to live with . he even disturb orr , who wa not easi to live with , either , and who , on the day yossarian came back , wa tinker with the faucet that fed gasolin into the stove he had start build while yossarian wa in the hospit . “ what are you do ? ” yossarian ask guardedli when he enter the tent , although he saw at onc . “ there ’ s a leak here , ” orr said . “ i ’ m tri to fix it. ” “ pleas stop it , ” said yossarian . “ you ’ re make me nervous. ” “ when i wa a kid , ” orr repli , “ i use to walk around all day with crab appl in my cheek . one in each cheek. ” yossarian put asid the musett bag from which he had begun remov hi toilet articl and brace himself suspici . a minut pass . “ whi ? ” he found himself forc to ask final . orr titter triumphantli . “ becaus they ’ re better than hors chestnut , ” he answer . orr wa kneel on the floor of the tent . he work without paus , take the faucet apart , spread all the tini piec out care , count and then studi each one intermin as though he had never seen anyth remot similar befor , and then reassembl the whole apparatu , over and over and over and over again , with no loss of patienc or interest , no sign of fatigu , no indic of ever conclud . yossarian watch him tinker and felt certain he would be compel to murder him in cold blood if he did not stop . hi eye move toward the hunt knife that had been slung over the mosquito-net bar by the dead man the day he arriv . the knife hung besid the dead man ’ s empti leather gun holster , from which havermey had stolen the gun . “ when i couldn ’ t get crab appl , ” orr continu , “ i use hors chestnut . hors chestnut are about the same size as crab appl and actual have a better shape , although the shape doesn ’ t matter a bit. ” “ whi did you walk around with crab appl in your cheek ? ” yossarian ask again . “ that ’ s what i asked. ” “ becaus they ’ ve got a better shape than hors chestnut , ” orr answer . “ i just told you that. ” “ whi , ” swore yossarian at him approvingli , “ you evil-ey , mechanically-aptitud , disaffili son of a bitch , did you walk around with anyth in your cheek ? ” “ i didn ’ t , ” orr said , “ walk around with anyth in my cheek . i walk around with crab appl in my cheek . when i couldn ’ t get crab appl i walk around with hors chestnut . in my cheeks. ” orr giggl . yossarian made up hi mind to keep hi mouth shut and did . orr wait . yossarian wait longer . “ one in each cheek , ” orr said . “ whi ? ” orr pounc . “ whi what ? ” yossarian shook hi head , smile , and refus to say . “ it ’ s a funni thing about thi valv , ” orr muse aloud . “ what is ? ” yossarian ask . “ becaus i wanted- “ yossarian knew . “ jesu christ ! whi did you want- “ “ -appl cheeks. ” “ -appl cheek ? ” yossarian demand . “ i want appl cheek , ” orr repeat . “ even when i wa a kid i want appl cheek someday , and i decid to work at it until i got them , and by god , i did work at it until i got them , and that ’ s how i did it , with crab appl in my cheek all day long. ” he giggl again . “ one in each cheek. ” “ whi did you want appl cheek ? ” “ i didn ’ t want appl cheek , ” orr said . “ i want big cheek . i didn ’ t care about the color so much , but i want them big . i work at it just like one of those crazi guy you read about who go around squeez rubber ball all day long just to strengthen their hand . in fact , i wa one of those crazi guy . i use to walk around all day with rubber ball in my hand , too. ” “ whi ? ” “ whi what ? ” “ whi did you walk around all day with rubber ball in your hand ? ” “ becaus rubber balls- “ said orr . “ -are better than crab appl ? ” orr snigger as he shook hi head . “ i did it to protect my good reput in case anyon ever caught me walk around with crab appl in my cheek . with rubber ball in my hand i could deni there were crab appl in my cheek . everi time someon ask me whi i wa walk around with crab appl in my cheek , i ’ d just open my hand and show them it wa rubber ball i wa walk around with , not crab appl , and that they were in my hand , not my cheek . it wa a good stori . but i never knew if it got across or not , sinc it ’ s pretti tough to make peopl understand you when you ’ re talk to them with two crab appl in your cheeks. ” yossarian found it pretti tough to understand him then , and he wonder onc again if orr wasn ’ t talk to him with the tip of hi tongu in one of hi appl cheek . yossarian decid not to utter anoth word . it would be futil . he knew orr , and he knew there wa not a chanc in hell of find out from him then whi he had want big cheek . it would do no more good to ask than it had done to ask him whi that whore had kept beat him over the head with her shoe that morn in rome in the cramp vestibul outsid the open door of nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister ’ s room . she wa a tall , strap girl with long hair and incandesc blue vein converg popul beneath her cocoa-color skin where the flesh wa most tender , and she kept curs and shriek and jump high up into the air on her bare feet to keep right on hit him on the top of hi head with the spike heel of her shoe . they were both nake , and rais a rumpu that brought everyon in the apart into the hall to watch , each coupl in a bedroom doorway , all of them nake except the apron and sweater old woman , who cluck reprovingli , and the lecher , dissip old man , who cackl aloud hilari through the whole episod with a kind of avid and superior glee . the girl shriek and orr giggl . each time she land with the heel of her shoe , orr giggl louder , infuri her still further so that she flew up still higher into the air for anoth shot at hi noodl , her wondrous full breast soar all over the place like billow pennant in a strong wind and her buttock and strong thigh shim-sham-shimmi thi way and that way like some horrifi bonanza . she shriek and orr giggl right up to the time she shriek and knock him cold with a good solid crack on the templ that made him stop giggl and sent him off to the hospit in a stretcher with a hole in hi head that wasn ’ t veri deep and a veri mild concuss that kept him out of combat onli twelv day . nobodi could find out what had happen , not even the cackl old man and cluck old woman , who were in a posit to find out everyth that happen in that vast and endless brothel with it multitudin bedroom on face side of the narrow hallway go off in opposit direct from the spaciou sit room with it shade window and singl lamp . everi time she met orr after that , she ’ d hoist her skirt up over her tight white elast panti and , jeer coars , bulg her firm , round belli out at him , curs him contemptu and then roar with huski laughter as she saw him giggl fear and take refug behind yossarian . whatev he had done or tri to do or fail to do behind the close door of nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister ’ s room wa still a secret . the girl wouldn ’ t tell nate ’ s whore or ani of the other whore or nate or yossarian . orr might tell , but yossarian had decid not to utter anoth word . “ do you want to know whi i want big cheek ? ” orr ask . yossarian kept hi mouth shut . “ do you rememb , ” orr said , “ that time in rome when that girl who can ’ t stand you kept hit me over the head with the heel of her shoe ? do you want to know whi she wa hit me ? ” it wa still imposs to imagin what he could have done to make her angri enough to hammer him over the head for fifteen or twenti minut , yet not angri enough to pick him up by the ankl and dash hi brain out . she wa certainli tall enough , and orr wa certainli short enough . orr had buck teeth and bulg eye to go with hi big cheek and wa even smaller than young hupl , who live on the wrong side of the railroad track in the tent in the administr area in which hungri joe lay scream in hi sleep everi night . the administr area in which hungri joe had pitch hi tent by mistak lay in the center of the squadron between the ditch , with it rust railroad track , and the tilt black bitumin road . the men could pick up girl along that road if they promis to take them where they want to go , buxom , young , home , grin girl with miss teeth whom they could drive off the road and lie down in the wild grass with , and yossarian did whenev he could , which wa not nearli as often as hungri joe , who could get a jeep but couldn ’ t drive , beg him to tri . the tent of the enlist men in the squadron stood on the other side of the road alongsid the open-air movi theater in which , for the daili amus of the die , ignor armi clash by night on a collaps screen , and to which anoth u.s.o . troup came that same afternoon . the u.s.o . troup were sent by gener p. p. peckem , who had move hi headquart up to rome and had noth better to do while he scheme against gener dreedl . gener peckem wa a gener with whom neat definit count . he wa a spri , suav and veri precis gener who knew the circumfer of the equat and alway wrote “ enhanc ” when he meant “ increas ” . he wa a prick , and no one knew thi better than gener dreedl , who wa incens by gener peckem ’ s recent direct requir all tent in the mediterranean theater of oper to be pitch along parallel line with entranc face back proudli toward the washington monument . to gener dreedl , who ran a fight outfit , it seem a lot of crap . furthermor , it wa none of gener peckem ’ s goddam busi how the tent in gener dreedl ’ s wing were pitch . there then follow a hectic jurisdict disput between these overlord that wa decid in gener dreedl ’ s favor by ex-p.f.c . wintergreen , mail clerk at twenty-seventh air forc headquart . wintergreen determin the outcom by throw all commun from gener peckem into the wastebasket . he found them too prolix . gener dreedl ’ s view , express in less pretenti literari style , pleas ex-p.f.c . wintergreen and were sped along by him in zealou observ of regul . gener dreedl wa victori by default . to regain whatev statu he had lost , gener peckem began send out more u.s.o . troup than he had ever sent out befor and assign to colonel cargil himself the respons of gener enough enthusiasm for them . but there wa no enthusiasm in yossarian ’ s group . in yossarian ’ s group there wa onli a mount number of enlist men and offic who found their way solemnli to sergeant towser sever time a day to ask if the order send them home had come in . they were men who had finish their fifti mission . there were more of them now than when yossarian had gone into the hospit , and they were still wait . they worri and bit their nail . they were grotesqu , like useless young men in a depress . they move sideway , like crab . they were wait for the order send them home to safeti to return from twenty-seventh air forc headquart in itali , and while they wait they had noth to do but worri and bite their nail and find their way solemnli to sergeant towser sever time a day to ask if the order send them home to safeti had come . they were in a race and knew it , becaus they knew from bitter experi that colonel cathcart might rais the number of mission again at ani time . they had noth better to do than wait . onli hungri joe had someth better to do each time he finish hi mission . he had scream nightmar and won fist fight with hupl ’ s cat . he took hi camera to the front row of everi u.s.o . show and tri to shoot pictur up the skirt of the yellow-head singer with two big one in a sequin dress that alway seem readi to burst . the pictur never came out . colonel cargil , gener peckem ’ s troubleshoot , wa a forc , ruddi man . befor the war he had been an alert , hardhit , aggress market execut . he wa a veri bad market execut . colonel cargil wa so aw a market execut that hi servic were much sought after by firm eager to establish loss for tax purpos . throughout the civil world , from batteri park to fulton street , he wa known as a depend man for a fast tax write-off . hi price were high , for failur often did not come easili . he had to start at the top and work hi way down , and with sympathet friend in washington , lose money wa no simpl matter . it took month of hard work and care misplan . a person misplac , disorgan , miscalcul , overlook everyth and open everi loophol , and just when he thought he had it made , the govern gave him a lake or a forest or an oilfield and spoil everyth . even with such handicap , colonel cargil could be reli on to run the most prosper enterpris into the ground . he wa a self-mad man who owe hi lack of success to nobodi . “ men , ” colonel cargil began in yossarian ’ s squadron , measur hi paus care . “ you ’ re american offic . the offic of no other armi in the world can make that statement . think about it. ” sergeant knight thought about it and then polit inform colonel cargil that he wa address the enlist men and that the offic were to be found wait for him on the other side of the squadron . colonel cargil thank him crispli and glow with self-satisfact as he strode across the area . it made him proud to observ that twenty-nin month in the servic had not blunt hi geniu for ineptitud . “ men , ” he began hi address to the offic , measur hi paus care . “ you ’ re american offic . the offic of no other armi in the world can make that statement . think about it. ” he wait a moment to permit them to think about it . “ these peopl are your guest ! ” he shout suddenli . “ they ’ ve travel over three thousand mile to entertain you . how are they go to feel if nobodi want to go out and watch them ? what ’ s go to happen to their moral ? now , men , it ’ s no skin off my behind . but that girl that want to play the accordion for you today is old enough to be a mother . how would you feel if your own mother travel over three thousand mile to play the accordion for some troop that didn ’ t want to watch her ? how is that kid whose mother that accordion player is old enough to be go to feel when he grow up and learn about it ? we all know the answer to that one . now , men , don ’ t misunderstand me . thi is all voluntari , of cours . i ’ d be the last colonel in the world to order you to go to that u.s.o . show and have a good time , but i want everi one of you who isn ’ t sick enough to be in a hospit to go to that u.s.o . show right now and have a good time , and that ’ s an order ! ” yossarian did feel almost sick enough to go back into the hospit , and he felt even sicker three combat mission later when doc daneeka still shook hi melancholi head and refus to ground him . “ you think you ’ ve got troubl ? ” doc daneeka rebuk him grievingli . “ what about me ? i live on peanut for eight year while i learn how to be a doctor . after the peanut , i live on chicken feed in my own offic until i could build up a practic decent enough to even pay expens . then , just as the shop wa final start to show a profit , they draft me . i don ’ t know what you ’ re complain about. ” doc daneeka wa yossarian ’ s friend and would do just about noth in hi power to help him . yossarian listen veri care as doc daneeka told him about colonel cathcart at group , who want to be a gener , about gener dreedl at wing and gener dreedl ’ s nurs , and about all the other gener at twenty-seventh air forc headquart , who insist on onli forti mission as a complet tour of duti . “ whi don ’ t you just smile and make the best of it ? ” he advis yossarian glumli . “ be like havermeyer. ” yossarian shudder at the suggest . havermey wa a lead bombardi who never took evas action go in to the target and therebi increas the danger of all the men who flew in the same format with him . “ havermey , whi the hell don ’ t you ever take evas action ? ” they would demand in a rage after the mission . “ hey , you men leav captain havermey alon , ” colonel cathcart would order . “ he ’ s the best damn bombardi we ’ ve got. ” havermey grin and nod and tri to explain how he dumdum the bullet with a hunt knife befor he fire them at the field mice in hi tent everi night . havermey wa the best damn bombardi they had , but he flew straight and level all the way from the i.p . to the target , and even far beyond the target until he saw the fall bomb strike ground and explod in a dart spurt of abrupt orang that flash beneath the swirl pall of smoke and pulver debri geyser up wildli in huge , roll wave of gray and black . havermey held mortal men rigid in six plane as steadi and still as sit duck while he follow the bomb all the way down through the plexiglass nose with deep interest and gave the german gunner below all the time they need to set their sight and take their aim and pull their trigger or lanyard or switch or whatev the hell they did pull when they want to kill peopl they didn ’ t know . havermey wa a lead bombardi who never miss . yossarian wa a lead bombardi who had been demot becaus he no longer gave a damn whether he miss or not . he had decid to live forev or die in the attempt , and hi onli mission each time he went up wa to come down aliv . the men had love fli behind yossarian , who use to come barrel in over the target from all direct and everi height , climb and dive and twist and turn so steepli and sharpli that it wa all the pilot of the other five plane could do to stay in format with him , level out onli for the two or three second it took for the bomb to drop and then zoom off again with an ach howl of engin , and wrench hi flight through the air so violent as he wove hi way through the filthi barrag of flak that the six plane were soon flung out all over the sky like prayer , each one a pushov for the german fighter , which wa just fine with yossarian , for there were no german fighter ani more and he did not want ani explod plane near hi when they explod . onli when all the sturm und drang had been left far behind would he tip hi flak helmet back wearili on hi sweat head and stop bark direct to mcwatt at the control , who had noth better to wonder about at a time like that than where the bomb had fallen . “ bomb bay clear , ” sergeant knight in the back would announc . “ did we hit the bridg ? ” mcwatt would ask . “ i couldn ’ t see , sir , i kept get bounc around back here pretti hard and i couldn ’ t see . everyth ’ s cover with smoke now and i can ’ t see. ” “ hey , aarfi , did the bomb hit the target ? ” “ what target ? ” captain aardvaark , yossarian ’ s plump , pipe-smok navig , would say from the confus of map he had creat at yossarian ’ s side in the nose of the ship . “ i don ’ t think we ’ re at the target yet . are we ? ” “ yossarian , did the bomb hit the target ? ” “ what bomb ? ” answer yossarian , whose onli concern had been the flak . “ oh , well , ” mcwatt would sing , “ what the hell. ” yossarian did not give a damn whether he hit the target or not , just as long as havermey or one of the other lead bombardi did and they never had to go back . everi now and then someon grew angri enough at havermey to throw a punch at him . “ i said you men leav captain havermey alon , ” colonel cathcart warn them all angrili . “ i said he ’ s the best damn bombardi we ’ ve got , didn ’ t i ? ” havermey grin at the colonel ’ s intervent and shove anoth piec of peanut brittl insid hi face . havermey had grown veri profici at shoot field mice at night with the gun he had stolen from the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent . hi bait wa a bar of candi and he would presight in the dark as he sat wait for the nibbl with a finger of hi other hand insid a loop of the line he had run from the frame of hi mosquito net to the chain of the unfrost light bulb overhead . the line wa taut as a banjo string , and the merest tug would snap it on and blind the shiver quarri in a blaze of light . havermey would chortl exultantli as he watch the tini mammal freez and roll it terrifi eye about in frantic search of the intrud . havermey would wait until the eye fell upon hi own and then he laugh aloud and pull the trigger at the same time , shower the rank , furri bodi all over the tent with a reverber crash and dispatch it timid soul back to hi or her creator . late one night , havermey fire a shot at a mous that brought hungri joe bolt out at him barefoot , rant at the top of hi screechi voic and empti hi own.45 into havermey ’ s tent as he came charg down one side of the ditch and up the other and vanish all at onc insid one of the slit trench that had appear like magic besid everi tent the morn after milo minderbind had bomb the squadron . it wa just befor dawn dure the great big sieg of bologna , when tongueless dead men peopl the night hour like live ghost and hungri joe wa half out of hi mind becaus he had finish hi mission again and wa not schedul to fli . hungri joe wa babbl incoher when they fish him out from the dank bottom of the slit trench , babbl of snake , rat and spider . the other flash their searchlight down just to make sure . there wa noth insid but a few inch of stagnant rain water . “ you see ? ” cri havermey . “ i told you . i told you he wa crazi , didn ’ t i ? ” 4 doc daneeka hungri joe wa crazi , and no one knew it better than yossarian , who did everyth he could to help him . hungri joe just wouldn ’ t listen to yossarian . hungri joe just wouldn ’ t listen becaus he thought yossarian wa crazi . “ whi should he listen to you ? ” doc daneeka inquir of yossarian without look up . “ becaus he ’ s got troubles. ” doc daneeka snort scorn . “ he think he ’ s got troubl ? what about me ? ” doc daneeka continu slowli with a gloomi sneer . “ oh , i ’ m not complain . i know there ’ s a war on . i know a lot of peopl are go to have to suffer for us to win it . but whi must i be one of them ? whi don ’ t they draft some of these old doctor who keep shoot their kisser off in public about what big sacrific the medic game stand readi to make ? i don ’ t want to make sacrific . i want to make dough. ” doc daneeka wa a veri neat , clean man whose idea of a good time wa to sulk . he had a dark complexion and a small , wise , saturnin face with mourn pouch under both eye . he brood over hi health continu and went almost daili to the medic tent to have hi temperatur taken by one of the two enlist men there who ran thing for him practic on their own , and ran it so effici that he wa left with littl els to do but sit in the sunlight with hi stuf nose and wonder what other peopl were so worri about . their name were gu and we and they had succeed in elev medicin to an exact scienc . all men report on sick call with temperatur abov 102 were rush to the hospit . all those except yossarian report on sick call with temperatur below 102 had their gum and toe paint with gentian violet solut and were given a lax to throw away into the bush . all those report on a sick call with temperatur of exactli 102 were ask to return in an hour to have their temperatur taken again . yossarian , with hi temperatur of 101 , could go to the hospit whenev he want to becaus he wa not afraid of them . the system work just fine for everybodi , especi for doc daneeka , who found himself with all the time he need to watch old major -- de coverley pitch horsesho in hi privat horseshoe-pitch pit , still wear the transpar eye patch doc daneeka had fashion for him from the strip of celluloid stolen from major major ’ s orderli room window month befor when major -- de coverley had return from rome with an injur cornea after rent two apart there for the offic and enlist men to use on their rest leav . the onli time doc daneeka ever went to the medic tent wa the time he began to feel he wa a veri sick man each day and stop in just to have gu and we look him over . they could never find anyth wrong with him . hi temperatur wa alway 96.8 , which wa perfectli all right with them , as long as he didn ’ t mind . doc daneeka did mind . he wa begin to lose confid in gu and we and wa think of have them both transfer back to the motor pool and replac by someon who could find someth wrong . doc daneeka wa person familiar with a number of thing that were drastic wrong . in addit to hi health , he worri about the pacif ocean and flight time . health wa someth no one ever could be sure of for a long enough time . the pacif ocean wa a bodi of water surround on all side by elephantiasi and other dread diseas to which , if he ever displeas colonel cathcart by ground yossarian , he might suddenli find himself transfer . and flight time wa the time he had to spend in airplan flight each month in order to get hi flight pay . doc daneeka hate to fli . he felt imprison in an airplan . in an airplan there wa absolut no place in the world to go except to anoth part of the airplan . doc daneeka had been told that peopl who enjoy climb into an airplan were realli give vent to a subconsci desir to climb back into the womb . he had been told thi by yossarian , who made it possibl for dan daneeka to collect hi flight pay each month without ever climb back into the womb . yossarian would persuad mcwatt to enter doc daneeka ’ s name on hi flight log for train mission or trip to rome . “ you know how it is , ” doc daneeka had wheedl , with a sli , conspiratori wink . “ whi take chanc when i don ’ t have to ? ” “ sure , ” yossarian agre . “ what differ doe it make to anyon if i ’ m in the plane or not ? ” “ no difference. ” “ sure , that ’ s what i mean , ” doc daneeka said . “ a littl greas is what make thi world go round . one hand wash the other . know what i mean ? you scratch my back , i ’ ll scratch yours. ” yossarian knew what he meant . “ that ’ s not what i meant , ” doc daneeka said , as yossarian began scratch hi back . “ i ’ m talk about co-oper . favor . you do a favor for me , i ’ ll do one for you . get it ? ” “ do one for me , ” yossarian request . “ not a chanc , ” doc daneeka answer . there wa someth fear and minut about doc daneeka as he sat despond outsid hi tent in the sunlight as often as he could , dress in khaki summer trouser and a short-sleev summer shirt that wa bleach almost to an antisept gray by the daili launder to which he had it subject . he wa like a man who had grown frozen with horror onc and had never come complet unthaw . he sat all tuck up into himself , hi slender shoulder huddl halfway around hi head , hi suntan hand with their lumin silver fingernail massag the back of hi bare , fold arm gentli as though he were cold . actual , he wa a veri warm , compassion man who never stop feel sorri for himself . “ whi me ? ” wa hi constant lament , and the question wa a good one . yossarian knew it wa a good one becaus yossarian wa a collector of good question and had use them to disrupt the educ session cleving had onc conduct two night a week in captain black ’ s intellig tent with the corpor in eyeglass who everybodi knew wa probabl a subvers . captain black knew he wa a subvers becaus he wore eyeglass and use word like panacea and utopia , and becaus he disapprov of adolf hitler , who had done such a great job of combat un-american activ in germani . yossarian attend the educ session becaus he want to find out whi so mani peopl were work so hard to kill him . a hand of other men were also interest , and the question were mani and good when cleving and the subvers corpor finish and made the mistak of ask if there were ani . “ who is spain ? ” “ whi is hitler ? ” “ when is right ? ” “ where wa that stoop and mealy-color old man i use to call poppa when the merry-go-round broke down ? ” “ how wa trump at munich ? ” “ ho-ho beriberi. ” and “ ball ! ” all rang out in rapid success , and then there wa yossarian with the question that had no answer : “ where are the snowden of yesteryear ? ” the question upset them , becaus snowden had been kill over avignon when dobb went crazi in mid-air and seiz the control away from hupl . the corpor play it dumb . “ what ? ” he ask . “ where are the snowden of yesteryear ? ” “ i ’ m afraid i don ’ t understand. ” “ où sont le neigeden d ’ antan ? ” yossarian said to make it easier for him . “ parlez en anglai , for christ ’ s sake , ” said the corpor . “ je ne parl pa français. ” “ neither do i , ” answer yossarian , who wa readi to pursu him through all the word in the world to wring the knowledg from him if he could , but cleving interven , pale , thin , and labor for breath , a humid coat of tear alreadi glisten in hi undernourish eye . group headquart wa alarm , for there wa no tell what peopl might find out onc they felt free to ask whatev question they want to . colonel cathcart sent colonel korn to stop it , and colonel korn succeed with a rule govern the ask of question . colonel korn ’ s rule wa a stroke of geniu , colonel korn explain in hi report to colonel cathcart . under colonel korn ’ s rule , the onli peopl permit to ask question were those who never did . soon the onli peopl attend were those who never ask question , and the session were discontinu altogeth , sinc cleving , the corpor and colonel korn agre that it wa neither possibl nor necessari to educ peopl who never question anyth . colonel cathcart and lieuten colonel korn live and work in the group headquart build , as did all the member of the headquart staff , with the except of the chaplain . the group headquart build wa an enorm , windi , antiqu structur built of powderi red stone and bang plumb . behind the build wa the modern skeet-shoot rang that had been construct by colonel cathcart for the exclus recreat of the offic at group and at which everi offic and enlist man on combat statu now , thank to gener dreedl , had to spend a minimum of eight hour a month . yossarian shot skeet , but never hit ani . applebi shot skeet and never miss . yossarian wa as bad at shoot skeet as he wa at gambl . he could never win money gambl either . even when he cheat he couldn ’ t win , becaus the peopl he cheat against were alway better at cheat too . these were two disappoint to which he had resign himself : he would never be a skeet shooter , and he would never make money . “ it take brain not to make money , ” colonel cargil wrote in one of the homilet memoranda he regularli prepar for circul over gener peckem ’ s signatur . “ ani fool can make money these day and most of them do . but what about peopl with talent and brain ? name , for exampl , one poet who make money. ” “ t . s. eliot , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen said in hi mail-sort cubicl at twenty-seventh air forc headquart , and slam down the telephon without identifi himself . colonel cargil , in rome , wa perplex . “ who wa it ? ” ask gener peckem . “ i don ’ t know , ” colonel cargil repli . “ what did he want ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ well , what did he say ? ” “ ’ t . s. eliot , ’ ” colonel cargil inform him . “ what ’ s that ? ” “ ’ t . s. eliot , ’ ” colonel cargil repeat . “ just ‘ t . s. ’ - “ “ ye , sir . that ’ s all he said . just ‘ t . s. eliot. ’ ” “ i wonder what it mean , ” gener peckem reflect . colonel cargil wonder , too . “ t . s. eliot , ” gener peckem muse . “ t . s. eliot , ” colonel cargil echo with the same funer puzzlement . gener peckem rous himself after a moment with an unctuou and benign smile . hi express wa shrewd and sophist . hi eye gleam malici . “ have someon get me gener dreedl , ” he request colonel cargil . “ don ’ t let him know who ’ s calling. ” colonel cargil hand him the phone . “ t . s. eliot , ” gener peckem said , and hung up . “ who wa it ? ” ask colonel moodu . gener dreedl , in corsica , did not repli . colonel moodu wa gener dreedl ’ s son-in-law , and gener dreedl , at the insist of hi wife and against hi own better judgment , had taken him into the militari busi . gener dreedl gaze at colonel moodu with level hatr . he detest the veri sight of hi son-in-law , who wa hi aid and therefor in constant attend upon him . he had oppos hi daughter ’ s marriag to colonel moodu becaus he dislik attend wed . wear a menac and preoccupi scowl , gener dreedl move to the full-length mirror in hi offic and stare at hi stocki reflect . he had a grizzl , broad-brow head with iron-gray tuft over hi eye and a blunt and belliger jaw . he brood in ponder specul over the cryptic messag he had just receiv . slowli hi face soften with an idea , and he curl hi lip with wick pleasur . “ get peckem , ” he told colonel moodu . “ don ’ t let the bastard know who ’ s calling. ” “ who wa it ? ” ask colonel cargil , back in rome . “ that same person , ” gener peckem repli with a definit trace of alarm . “ now he ’ s after me. ” “ what did he want ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ what did he say ? ” “ the same thing. ” “ ’ t . s. eliot ’ ? ” “ ye , ‘ t . s. eliot. ’ that ’ s all he said. ” gener peckem had a hope thought . “ perhap it ’ s a new code or someth , like the color of the day . whi don ’ t you have someon check with commun and see if it ’ s a new code or someth or the color of the day ? ” commun answer that t. s. eliot wa not a new code or the color of the day . colonel cargil had the next idea . “ mayb i ought to phone twenty-seventh air forc headquart and see if they know anyth about it . they have a clerk up there name wintergreen i ’ m pretti close to . he ’ s the one who tip me off that our prose wa too prolix. ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen told cargil that there wa no record at twenty-seventh air forc headquart of a t. s. eliot . “ how ’ s our prose these day ? ” colonel cargil decid to inquir while he had ex-p.f.c . wintergreen on the phone . “ it ’ s much better now , isn ’ t it ? ” “ it ’ s still too prolix , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen repli . “ it wouldn ’ t surpris me if gener dreedl were behind the whole thing , ” gener peckem confess at last . “ rememb what he did to that skeet-shoot rang ? ” gener dreedl had thrown open colonel cathcart ’ s privat skeet-shoot rang to everi offic and enlist man in the group on combat duti . gener dreedl want hi men to spend as much time out on the skeet-shoot rang as the facil and their flight schedul would allow . shoot skeet eight hour a month wa excel train for them . it train them to shoot skeet . dunbar love shoot skeet becaus he hate everi minut of it and the time pass so slowli . he had figur out that a singl hour on the skeet-shoot rang with peopl like havermey and applebi could be worth as much as eleven-times-seventeen year . “ i think you ’ re crazi , ” wa the way cleving had respond to dunbar ’ s discoveri . “ who want to know ? ” dunbar answer . “ i mean it , ” cleving insist . “ who care ? ” dunbar answer . “ i realli do . i ’ ll even go so far as to conced that life seem longer i- “ “ -i longer i- “ “ -i longer-i longer ? all right , is longer if it ’ s fill with period of boredom and discomfort , b- “ “ guess how fast ? ” dunbar said suddenli . “ huh ? ” “ they go , ” dunbar explain . “ years. ” “ years. ” “ year , ” said dunbar . “ year , year , years. ” “ cleving , whi don ’ t you let dunbar alon ? ” yossarian broke in . “ don ’ t you realiz the toll thi is take ? ” “ it ’ s all right , ” said dunbar magnanim . “ i have some decad to spare . do you know how long a year take when it ’ s go away ? ” “ and you shut up also , ” yossarian told orr , who had begun to snigger . “ i wa just think about that girl , ” orr said . “ that girl in sicili . that girl in sicili with the bald head. ” “ you ’ d better shut up also , ” yossarian warn him . “ it ’ s your fault , ” dunbar said to yossarian . “ whi don ’ t you let him snigger if he want to ? it ’ s better than have him talking. ” “ all right . go ahead and snigger if you want to. ” “ do you know how long a year take when it ’ s go away ? ” dunbar repeat to cleving . “ thi long. ” he snap hi finger . “ a second ago you were step into colleg with your lung full of fresh air . today you ’ re an old man. ” “ old ? ” ask cleving with surpris . “ what are you talk about ? ” “ old. ” “ i ’ m not old. ” “ you ’ re inch away from death everi time you go on a mission . how much older can you be at your age ? a half minut befor that you were step into high school , and an unhook brassier wa as close as you ever hope to get to paradis . onli a fifth of a second befor that you were a small kid with a ten-week summer vacat that last a hundr thousand year and still end too soon . zip ! they go rocket by so fast . how the hell els are you ever go to slow time down ? ” dunbar wa almost angri when he finish . “ well , mayb it is true , ” cleving conced unwillingli in a subdu tone . “ mayb a long life doe have to be fill with mani unpleas condit if it ’ s to seem long . but in that event , who want one ? ” “ i do , ” dunbar told him . “ whi ? ” cleving ask . “ what els is there ? ” 5 chief white halfoat doc daneeka live in a splotch gray tent with chief white halfoat , whom he fear and despis . “ i can just pictur hi liver , ” doc daneeka grumbl . “ pictur my liver , ” yossarian advis him . “ there ’ s noth wrong with your liver. ” “ that show how much you don ’ t know , ” yossarian bluf , and told doc daneeka about the troublesom pain in hi liver that had troubl nurs duckett and nurs cramer and all the doctor in the hospit becaus it wouldn ’ t becom jaundic and wouldn ’ t go away . doc daneeka wasn ’ t interest . “ you think you ’ ve got troubl ? ” he want to know . “ what about me ? you should ’ ve been in my offic the day those newlyw walk in. ” “ what newlyw ? ” “ those newlyw that walk into my offic one day . didn ’ t i ever tell you about them ? she wa lovely. ” so wa doc daneeka ’ s offic . he had decor hi wait room with goldfish and one of the finest suit of cheap furnitur . whatev he could he bought on credit , even the goldfish . for the rest , he obtain money from greedi rel in exchang for share of the profit . hi offic wa in staten island in a two-famili firetrap just four block away from the ferri stop and onli one block south of a supermarket , three beauti parlor , and two corrupt druggist . it wa a corner locat , but noth help . popul turnov wa small , and peopl clung through habit to the same physician they had been do busi with for year . bill pile up rapidli , and he wa soon face with the loss of hi most preciou medic instrument : hi ad machin wa repossess , and then hi typewrit . the goldfish die . fortun , just when thing were blackest , the war broke out . “ it wa a godsend , ” doc daneeka confess solemnli . “ most of the other doctor were soon in the servic , and thing pick up overnight . the corner locat realli start pay off , and i soon found myself handl more patient than i could handl compet . i up my kickback fee with those two drugstor . the beauti parlor were good for two , three abort a week . thing couldn ’ t have been better , and then look what happen . they had to send a guy from the draft board around to look me over . i wa four-f . i had examin myself pretti thoroughli and discov that i wa unfit for militari servic . you ’ d think my word would be enough , wouldn ’ t you , sinc i wa a doctor in good stand with my counti medic societi and with my local better busi bureau . but no , it wasn ’ t , and they sent thi guy around just to make sure i realli did have one leg amput at the hip and wa helplessli bedridden with incur rheumatoid arthriti . yossarian , we live in an age of distrust and deterior spiritu valu . it ’ s a terribl thing , ” doc daneeka protest in a voic quaver with strong emot . “ it ’ s a terribl thing when even the word of a licens physician is suspect by the countri he loves. ” doc daneeka had been draft and ship to pianosa as a flight surgeon , even though he wa terrifi of fli . “ i don ’ t have to go look for troubl in an airplan , ” he note , blink hi beadi , brown , offend eye myopic . “ it come look for me . like that virgin i ’ m tell you about that couldn ’ t have a baby. ” “ what virgin ? ” yossarian ask . “ i thought you were tell me about some newlyweds. ” “ that ’ s the virgin i ’ m tell you about . they were just a coupl of young kid , and they ’ d been marri , oh , a littl over a year when they came walk into my offic without an appoint . you should have seen her . she wa so sweet and young and pretti . she even blush when i ask about her period . i don ’ t think i ’ ll ever stop love that girl . she wa built like a dream and wore a chain around her neck with a medal of saint anthoni hang down insid the most beauti bosom i never saw . ‘ it must be a terribl temptat for saint anthoni , ’ i joked-just to put her at eas , you know . ‘ saint anthoni ? ’ her husband said . ‘ who ’ s saint anthoni ? ’ ‘ ask your wife , ’ i told him . ‘ she can tell you who saint anthoni is. ’ ‘ who is saint anthoni ? ’ he ask her . ‘ who ? ’ she want to know . ‘ saint anthoni , ’ he told her . ‘ saint anthoni ? ’ she said . ‘ who ’ s saint anthoni ? ’ when i got a good look at her insid my examin room i found she wa still a virgin . i spoke to her husband alon while she wa pull her girdl back on and hook it onto her stock . ‘ everi night , ’ he boast . a real wise guy , you know . ‘ i never miss a night , ’ he boast . he meant it , too . ‘ i even been puttin ’ it to her morn befor the breakfast she make me befor we go to work , ’ he boast . there wa onli one explan . when i had them both togeth again i gave them a demonstr of intercours with the rubber model i ’ ve got in my offic . i ’ ve got these rubber model in my offic with all the reproduct organ of both sex that i keep lock up in separ cabinet to avoid a scandal . i mean i use to have them . i don ’ t have anyth ani more , not even a practic . the onli thing i have now is thi low temperatur that i ’ m realli start to worri about . those two kid i ’ ve got work for me in the medic tent aren ’ t worth a damn as diagnostician . all they know how to do is complain . they think they ’ ve got troubl ? what about me ? they should have been in my offic that day with those two newlyw look at me as though i were tell them someth nobodi ’ d ever heard of befor . you never saw anybodi so interest . ‘ you mean like thi ? ’ he ask me , and work the model for himself awhil . you know , i can see where a certain type of person might get a big kick out of do just that . ‘ that ’ s it , ’ i told him . ‘ now , you go home and tri it my way for a few month and see what happen . okay ? ’ ‘ okay , ’ they said , and paid me in cash without ani argument . ‘ have a good time , ’ i told them , and they thank me and walk out togeth . he had hi arm around her waist as though he couldn ’ t wait to get her home and put it to her again . a few day later he came back all by himself and told my nurs he had to see me right away . as soon as we were alon , he punch me in the nose. ” “ he did what ? ” “ he call me a wise guy and punch me in the nose . ‘ what are you , a wise guy ? ’ he said , and knock me flat on my ass . pow ! just like that . i ’ m not kidding. ” “ i know you ’ re not kid , ” yossarian said . “ but whi did he do it ? ” “ how should i know whi he did it ? ” doc daneeka retort with annoy . “ mayb it had someth to do with saint anthoni ? ” doc daneeka look at yossarian blankli . “ saint anthoni ? ” he ask with astonish . “ who ’ s saint anthoni ? ” “ how should i know ? ” answer chief white halfoat , stagger insid the tent just then with a bottl of whiskey cradl in hi arm and sit himself down pugnaci between the two of them . doc daneeka rose without a word and move hi chair outsid the tent , hi back bow by the compact kit of injustic that wa hi perpetu burden . he could not bear the compani of hi roommat . chief white halfoat thought he wa crazi . “ i don ’ t know what ’ s the matter with that guy , ” he observ reproach . “ he ’ s got no brain , that ’ s what ’ s the matter with him . if he had ani brain he ’ d grab a shovel and start dig . right here in the tent , he ’ d start dig , right under my cot . he ’ d strike oil in no time . don ’ t he know how that enlist man struck oil with a shovel back in the state ? didn ’ t he ever hear what happen to that kid-what wa the name of that rotten rat bastard pimp of a snotnos back in colorado ? ” “ wintergreen. ” “ wintergreen. ” “ he ’ s afraid , ” yossarian explain . “ oh , no . not wintergreen. ” chief white halfoat shook hi head with undisguis admir . “ that stink littl punk wise-guy son of a bitch ain ’ t afraid of nobody. ” “ doc daneeka ’ s afraid . that ’ s what ’ s the matter with him. ” “ what ’ s he afraid of ? ” “ he ’ s afraid of you , ” yossarian said . “ he ’ s afraid you ’ re go to die of pneumonia. ” “ he ’ d better be afraid , ” chief white halfoat said . a deep , low laugh rumbl through hi massiv chest . “ i will , too , the first chanc i get . you just wait and see. ” chief white halfoat wa a handsom , swarthi indian from oklahoma with a heavi , hard-bon face and tousl black hair , a half-blood creek from enid who , for occult reason of hi own , had made up hi mind to die of pneumonia . he wa a glower , veng , disillus indian who hate foreign with name like cathcart , korn , black and havermey and wish they ’ d all go back to where their lousi ancestor had come from . “ you wouldn ’ t believ it , yossarian , ” he rumin , rais hi voic deliber to bait doc daneeka , “ but thi use to be a pretti good countri to live in befor they lous it up with their goddam piety. ” chief white halfoat wa out to reveng himself upon the white man . he could bare read or write and had been assign to captain black as assist intellig offic . “ how could i learn to read or write ? ” chief white halfoat demand with simul belliger , rais hi voic again so that doc daneeka would hear . “ everi place we pitch our tent , they sank an oil well . everi time they sank a well , they hit oil . and everi time they hit oil , they made us pack up our tent and go someplac els . we were human divin rod . our whole famili had a natur affin for petroleum deposit , and soon everi oil compani in the world had technician chase us around . we were alway on the move . it wa one hell of a way to bring a child up , i can tell you . i don ’ t think i ever spent more than a week in one place. ” hi earliest memori wa of a geologist . “ everi time anoth white halfoat wa born , ” he continu , “ the stock market turn bullish . soon whole drill crew were follow us around with all their equip just to get the jump on each other . compani began to merg just so they could cut down on the number of peopl they had to assign to us . but the crowd in back of us kept grow . we never got a good night ’ s sleep . when we stop , they stop . when we move , they move , chuckwagon , bulldoz , derrick , gener . we were a walk busi boom , and we began to receiv invit from some of the best hotel just for the amount of busi we would drag into town with us . some of those invit were mighti gener , but we couldn ’ t accept ani becaus we were indian and all the best hotel that were invit us wouldn ’ t accept indian as guest . racial prejudic is a terribl thing , yossarian . it realli is . it ’ s a terribl thing to treat a decent , loyal indian like a nigger , kike , wop or spic. ” chief white halfoat nod slowli with convict . “ then , yossarian , it final happened-th begin of the end . they began to follow us around from in front . they would tri to guess where we were go to stop next and would begin drill befor we even got there , so we couldn ’ t stop . as soon as we ’ d begin to unrol our blanket , they would kick us off . they had confid in us . they wouldn ’ t even wait to strike oil befor they kick us off . we were so tire we almost didn ’ t care the day our time ran out . one morn we found ourselv complet surround by oilmen wait for us to come their way so they could kick us off . everywher you look there wa an oilman on a ridg , wait there like indian get readi to attack . it wa the end . we couldn ’ t stay where we were becaus we had just been kick off . and there wa no place left for us to go . onli the armi save me . luckili , the war broke out just in the nick of time , and a draft board pick me right up out of the middl and put me down safe in loweri field , colorado . i wa the onli survivor. ” yossarian knew he wa lie , but did not interrupt as chief white halfoat went on to claim that he had never heard from hi parent again . that didn ’ t bother him too much , though , for he had onli their word for it that they were hi parent , and sinc they had lie to him about so mani other thing , they could just as well have been lie to him about that too . he wa much better acquaint with the fate of a tribe of first cousin who had wander away north in a diversionari movement and push inadvert into canada . when they tri to return , they were stop at the border by american immigr author who would not let them back into the countri . they could not come back in becaus they were red . it wa a horribl joke , but doc daneeka didn ’ t laugh until yossarian came to him one mission later and plead again , without ani real expect of success , to be ground . doc daneeka snicker onc and wa soon immers in problem of hi own , which includ chief white halfoat , who had been challeng him all that morn to indian wrestl , and yossarian , who decid right then and there to go crazi . “ you ’ re wast your time , ” doc daneeka wa forc to tell him . “ can ’ t you ground someon who ’ s crazi ? ” “ oh , sure . i have to . there ’ s a rule say i have to ground anyon who ’ s crazy. ” “ then whi don ’ t you ground me ? i ’ m crazi . ask clevinger. ” “ cleving ? where is cleving ? you find cleving and i ’ ll ask him. ” “ then ask ani of the other . they ’ ll tell you how crazi i am. ” “ they ’ re crazy. ” “ then whi don ’ t you ground them ? ” “ whi don ’ t they ask me to ground them ? ” “ becaus they ’ re crazi , that ’ s why. ” “ of cours they ’ re crazi , ” doc daneeka repli . “ i just told you they ’ re crazi , didn ’ t i ? and you can ’ t let crazi peopl decid whether you ’ re crazi or not , can you ? ” yossarian look at him soberli and tri anoth approach . “ is orr crazi ? ” “ he sure is , ” doc daneeka said . “ can you ground him ? ” “ i sure can . but first he ha to ask me to . that ’ s part of the rule. ” “ then whi doesn ’ t he ask you to ? ” “ becaus he ’ s crazi , ” doc daneeka said . “ he ha to be crazi to keep fli combat mission after all the close call he ’ s had . sure , i can ground orr . but first he ha to ask me to. ” “ that ’ s all he ha to do to be ground ? ” “ that ’ s all . let him ask me. ” “ and then you can ground him ? ” yossarian ask . “ no . then i can ’ t ground him. ” “ you mean there ’ s a catch ? ” “ sure there ’ s a catch , ” doc daneeka repli . “ catch-22 . anyon who want to get out of combat duti isn ’ t realli crazy. ” there wa onli one catch and that wa catch-22 , which specifi that a concern for one ’ s own safeti in the face of danger that were real and immedi wa the process of a ration mind . orr wa crazi and could be ground . all he had to do wa ask ; and as soon as he did , he would no longer be crazi and would have to fli more mission . orr would be crazi to fli more mission and sane if he didn ’ t , but if he wa sane he had to fli them . if he flew them he wa crazi and didn ’ t have to ; but if he didn ’ t want to he wa sane and had to . yossarian wa move veri deepli by the absolut simplic of thi claus of catch-22 and let out a respect whistl . “ that ’ s some catch , that catch-22 , ” he observ . “ it ’ s the best there is , ” doc daneeka agre . yossarian saw it clearli in all it spin reason . there wa an ellipt precis about it perfect pair of part that wa grace and shock , like good modern art , and at time yossarian wasn ’ t quit sure that he saw it at all , just the way he wa never quit sure about good modern art or about the fli orr saw in applebi ’ s eye . he had orr ’ s word to take for the fli in applebi ’ s eye . “ oh , they ’ re there , all right , ” orr had assur him about the fli in applebi ’ s eye after yossarian ’ s fist fight with applebi in the offic ’ club , “ although he probabl doesn ’ t even know it . that ’ s whi he can ’ t see thing as they realli are. ” “ how come he doesn ’ t know it ? ” inquir yossarian . “ becaus he ’ s got fli in hi eye , ” orr explain with exagger patienc . “ how can he see he ’ s got fli in hi eye if he ’ s got fli in hi eye ? ” it made as much sens as anyth els , and yossarian wa will to give orr the benefit of the doubt becaus orr wa from the wilder outsid new york citi and knew so much more about wildlif than yossarian did , and becaus orr , unlik yossarian ’ s mother , father , sister , brother , aunt , uncl , in-law , teacher , spiritu leader , legisl , neighbor and newspap , had never lie to him about anyth crucial befor . yossarian had mull hi newfound knowledg about applebi over in privat for a day or two and then decid , as a good deed , to pass the word along to applebi himself . “ applebi , you ’ ve got fli in your eye , ” he whisper help as they pass by each other in the doorway of the parachut tent on the day of the weekli milk run to parma . “ what ? ” applebi respond sharpli , thrown into confus by the fact that yossarian had spoken to him at all . “ you ’ ve got fli in your eye , ” yossarian repeat . “ that ’ s probabl whi you can ’ t see them. ” applebi retreat from yossarian with a look of loath bewilder and sulk in silenc until he wa in the jeep with havermey ride down the long , straight road to the brief room , where major danbi , the fidget group oper offic , wa wait to conduct the preliminari brief with all the lead pilot , bombardi and navig . applebi spoke in a soft voic so that he would not be heard by the driver or by captain black , who wa stretch out with hi eye close in the front seat of the jeep . “ havermey , ” he ask hesitantli . “ have i got fli in my eye ? ” havermey blink quizzic . “ sti ? ” he ask . “ no , fli , ” he wa told . havermey blink again . “ fli ? ” “ in my eyes. ” “ you must be crazi , ” havermey said . “ no , i ’ m not crazi . yossarian ’ s crazi . just tell me if i ’ ve got fli in my eye or not . go ahead . i can take it. ” havermey pop anoth piec of peanut brittl into hi mouth and peer veri close into applebi ’ s eye . “ i don ’ t see ani , ” he announc . applebi heav an immens sigh of relief . havermey had tini bit of peanut brittl adher to hi lip , chin and cheek . “ you ’ ve got peanut brittl crumb on your face , ” applebi remark to him . “ i ’ d rather have peanut brittl crumb on my face than fli in my eye , ” havermey retort . the offic of the other five plane in each flight arriv in truck for the gener brief that took place thirti minut later . the three enlist men in each crew were not brief at all , but were carri directli out on the airfield to the separ plane in which they were schedul to fli that day , where they wait around with the ground crew until the offic with whom they had been schedul to fli swung off the rattl tailgat of the truck deliv them and it wa time to climb aboard and start up . engin roll over disgruntedli on lollipop-shap hardstand , resist first , then idl smoothli awhil , and then the plane lumber around and nose forward lame over the pebbl ground like sightless , stupid , crippl thing until they taxi into the line at the foot of the land strip and took off swiftli , one behind the other , in a zoom , rise roar , bank slowli into format over mottl treetop , and circl the field at even speed until all the flight of six had been form and then set cours over cerulean water on the first leg of the journey to the target in northern itali or franc . the plane gain altitud steadili and were abov nine thousand feet by the time they cross into enemi territori . one of the surpris thing alway wa the sens of calm and utter silenc , broken onli by the test round fire from the machin gun , by an occasion toneless , ters remark over the intercom , and , at last , by the sober pronounc of the bombardi in each plane that they were at the i.p . and about to turn toward the target . there wa alway sunshin , alway a tini stick in the throat from the rarefi air . the b-25 they flew in were stabl , depend , dull-green ship with twin rudder and engin and wide wing . their singl fault , from where yossarian sat as a bombardi , wa the tight crawlway separ the bombardi ’ s compart in the plexiglass nose from the nearest escap hatch . the crawlway wa a narrow , squar , cold tunnel hollow out beneath the flight control , and a larg man like yossarian could squeez through onli with difficulti . a chubbi , moon-fac navig with littl reptilian eye and a pipe like aarfi ’ s had troubl , too , and yossarian use to chase him back from the nose as they turn toward the target , now minut away . there wa a time of tension then , a time of wait with noth to hear and noth to see and noth to do but wait as the antiaircraft gun below took aim and made readi to knock them all sprawl into infinit sleep if they could . the crawlway wa yossarian ’ s lifelin to outsid from a plane about to fall , but yossarian swore at it with seeth antagon , revil it as an obstacl put there by provid as part of the plot that would destroy him . there wa room for an addit escap hatch right there in the nose of a b-25 , but there wa no escap hatch . instead there wa the crawlway , and sinc the mess on the mission over avignon he had learn to detest everi mammoth inch of it , for it slung him second and second away from hi parachut , which wa too bulki to be taken up front with him , and second and second more after that away from the escap hatch on the floor between the rear of the elev flight deck and the feet of the faceless top turret gunner mount high abov . yossarian long to be where aarfi could be onc yossarian had chase him back from the nose ; yossarian long to sit on the floor in a huddl ball right on top of the escap hatch insid a shelter igloo of extra flak suit that he would have been happi to carri along with him , hi parachut alreadi hook to hi har where it belong , one fist clench the red-handl rip cord , one fist grip the emerg hatch releas that would spill him earthward into the air at the first dread squeal of destruct . that wa where he want to be if he had to be there at all , instead of hung out there in front like some goddam cantilev goldfish in some goddam cantilev goldfish bowl while the goddam foul black tier of flak were burst and boom and billow all around and abov and below him in a climb , crack , stagger , bang , phantasmagor , cosmolog wicked that jar and toss and shiver , clatter and pierc , and threaten to annihil them all in one splinter of a second in one vast flash of fire . aarfi had been no use to yossarian as a navig or as anyth els , and yossarian drove him back from the nose vehement each time so that they would not clutter up each other ’ s way if they had to scrambl suddenli for safeti . onc yossarian had driven him back from the nose , aarfi wa free to cower on the floor where yossarian long to cower , but he stood bolt upright instead with hi stumpi arm rest comfort on the back of the pilot ’ s and co-pilot ’ s seat , pipe in hand , make affabl small talk to mcwatt and whoever happen to be co-pilot and point out amus trivia in the sky to the two men , who were too busi to be interest . mcwatt wa too busi respond at the control to yossarian ’ s strident instruct as yossarian slip the plane in on the bomb run and then whip them all away violent around the raven pillar of explod shell with curt , shrill , obscen command to mcwatt that were much like the anguish , entreat nightmar yelp of hungri joe in the dark . aarfi would puff reflect on hi pipe throughout the whole chaotic clash , gaze with unruffl curios at the war through mcwatt ’ s window as though it were a remot disturb that could not affect him . aarfi wa a dedic fratern man who love cheerlead and class reunion and did not have brain enough to be afraid . yossarian did have brain enough and wa , and the onli thing that stop him from abandon hi post under fire and scurri back through the crawlway like a yellow-belli rat wa hi unwilling to entrust the evas action out of the target area to anybodi els . there wa nobodi els in the world he would honor with so great a respons . there wa nobodi els he knew who wa as big a coward . yossarian wa the best man in the group at evas action , but had no idea whi . there wa no establish procedur for evas action . all you need wa fear , and yossarian had plenti of that , more fear than orr or hungri joe , more fear than dunbar , who had resign himself submiss to the idea that he must die someday . yossarian had not resign himself to that idea , and he bolt for hi life wildli on each mission the instant hi bomb were away , holler , “ hard , hard , hard , hard , you bastard , hard ! ” at mcwatt and hate mcwatt vicious all the time as though mcwatt were to blame for their be up there at all to be rub out by stranger , and everybodi els in the plane kept off the intercom , except for the piti time of the mess on the mission to avignon when dobb went crazi in mid-air and began weep pathet for help . “ help him , help him , ” dobb sob . “ help him , help him. ” “ help who ? help who ? ” call back yossarian , onc he had plug hi headset back into the intercom system , after it had been jerk out when dobb wrest the control away from hupl and hurl them all down suddenli into the deafen , paralyz , horrifi dive which had plaster yossarian helplessli to the ceil of the plane by the top of hi head and from which hupl had rescu them just in time by seiz the control back from dobb and level the ship out almost as suddenli right back in the middl of the buffet layer of cacophon flak from which they had escap success onli a moment befor . oh , god ! oh , god , oh , god , yossarian had been plead wordlessli as he dangl from the ceil of the nose of the ship by the top of hi head , unabl to move . “ the bombardi , the bombardi , ” dobb answer in a cri when yossarian spoke . “ he doesn ’ t answer , he doesn ’ t answer . help the bombardi , help the bombardier. ” “ i ’ m the bombardi , ” yossarian cri back at him . “ i ’ m the bombardi . i ’ m all right . i ’ m all right. ” “ then help him , help him , ” dobb beg . “ help him , help him. ” and snowden lay die in back . 6 hungri joe hungri joe did have fifti mission , but they were no help . he had hi bag pack and wa wait again to go home . at night he had eeri , ear-split nightmar that kept everyon in the squadron awak but hupl , the fifteen-year-old pilot who had lie about hi age to get into the armi and live with hi pet cat in the same tent with hungri joe . hupl wa a light sleeper , but claim he never heard hungri joe scream . hungri joe wa sick . “ so what ? ” doc daneeka snarl resent . “ i had it made , i tell you . fifti grand a year i wa knock down , and almost all of it tax-fre , sinc i made my custom pay me in cash . i had the strongest trade associ in the world back me up . and look what happen . just when i wa all set to realli start stash it away , they had to manufactur fascism and start a war horribl enough to affect even me . i got ta laugh when i hear someon like hungri joe scream hi brain out everi night . i realli got ta laugh . he ’ s sick ? how doe he think i feel ? ” hungri joe wa too firmli embed in calam of hi own to care how doc daneeka felt . there were the nois , for instanc . small one enrag him and he holler himself hoars at aarfi for the wet , suck sound he made puf on hi pipe , at orr for tinker , at mcwatt for the explos snap he gave each card he turn over when he dealt at blackjack or poker , at dobb for let hi teeth chatter as he went blunder clumsili about bump into thing . hungri joe wa a throb , rag mass of motil irrit . the steadi tick of a watch in a quiet room crash like tortur against hi unshield brain . “ listen , kid , ” he explain harshli to hupl veri late one even , “ if you want to live in thi tent , you ’ ve got to do like i do . you ’ ve got to roll your wrist watch up in a pair of wool sock everi night and keep it on the bottom of your foot locker on the other side of the room. ” hupl thrust hi jaw out defiantli to let hungri joe know he couldn ’ t be push around and then did exactli as he had been told . hungri joe wa a jumpi , emaci wretch with a fleshless face of dingi skin and bone and twitch vein squirm subcutan in the blacken hollow behind hi eye like sever section of snake . it wa a desol , crater face , sooti with care like an abandon mine town . hungri joe ate voraci , gnaw incessantli at the tip of hi finger , stammer , choke , itch , sweat , saliv , and sprang from spot to spot fanat with an intric black camera with which he wa alway tri to take pictur of nake girl . they never came out . he wa alway forget to put film in the camera or turn on light or remov the cover from the len open . it wasn ’ t easi persuad nake girl to pose , but hungri joe had the knack . “ me big man , ” he would shout . “ me big photograph from life magazin . big pictur on heap big cover . si , si , si ! hollywood star . multi dinero . multi divorc . multi ficky-fick all day long. ” few women anywher could resist such wili cajoleri , and prostitut would spring to their feet eagerli and hurl themselv into whatev fantast pose he request for them . women kill hungri joe . hi respons to them as sexual be wa one of frenzi worship and idolatri . they were love , satisfi , madden manifest of the miracul , instrument of pleasur too power to be measur , too keen to be endur , and too exquisit to be intend for employ by base , unworthi man . he could interpret their nake presenc in hi hand onli as a cosmic oversight destin to be rectifi speedili , and he wa driven alway to make what carnal use of them he could in the fleet moment or two he felt he had befor someon caught wise and whisk them away . he could never decid whether to furgl them or photograph them , for he had found it imposs to do both simultan . in fact , he wa find it almost imposs to do either , so scrambl were hi power of perform by the compuls need for hast that invari possess him . the pictur never came out , and hungri joe never got in . the odd thing wa that in civilian life hungri joe realli had been a photograph for life magazin . he wa a hero now , the biggest hero the air forc had , yossarian felt , for he had flown more combat tour of duti than ani other hero the air forc had . he had flown six combat tour of duti . hungri joe had finish fli hi first combat tour of duti when twenty-f mission were all that were necessari for him to pack hi bag , write happi letter home and begin hound sergeant towser humor for the arriv of the order rotat him back to the state . while he wait , he spent each day shuffl rhythmic around the entranc of the oper tent , make boister wisecrack to everybodi who came by and jocos call sergeant towser a lousi son of a bitch everi time sergeant towser pop out of the orderli room . hungri joe had finish fli hi first twenty-f mission dure the week of the salerno beachhead , when yossarian wa laid up in the hospit with a burst of clap he had caught on a low-level mission over a wac in bush on a suppli flight to marrakech . yossarian did hi best to catch up with hungri joe and almost did , fli six mission in six day , but hi twenty-third mission wa to arezzo , where colonel never wa kill , and that wa as close as he had ever been abl to come to go home . the next day colonel cathcart wa there , brim with tough pride in hi new outfit and celebr hi assumpt of command by rais the number of mission requir from twenty-f to thirti . hungri joe unpack hi bag and rewrot the happi letter home . he stop hound sergeant towser humor . he began hate sergeant towser , focus all blame upon him venom , even though he knew sergeant towser had noth to do with the arriv of colonel cathcart or the delay in the process of ship order that might have rescu him seven day earlier and five time sinc . hungri joe could no longer stand the strain of wait for ship order and crumbl promptli into ruin everi time he finish anoth tour of duti . each time he wa taken off combat statu , he gave a big parti for the littl circl of friend he had . he broke out the bottl of bourbon he had manag to buy on hi four-day weekli circuit with the courier plane and laugh , sang , shuffl and shout in a festiv of inebri ecstasi until he could no longer keep awak and reced peac into slumber . as soon as yossarian , nate and dunbar put him to bed he began scream in hi sleep . in the morn he step from hi tent look haggard , fear and guilt-ridden , an eaten shell of a human build rock peril on the brink of collaps . the nightmar appear to hungri joe with celesti punctual everi singl night he spent in the squadron throughout the whole harrow ordeal when he wa not fli combat mission and wa wait onc again for the order send him home that never came . impression men in the squadron like dobb and captain flume were so deepli disturb by hungri joe ’ s shriek nightmar that they would begin to have shriek nightmar of their own , and the pierc obscen they flung into the air everi night from their separ place in the squadron rang against each other in the dark romant like the mate call of songbird with filthi mind . colonel korn act decis to arrest what seem to him to be the begin of an unwholesom trend in major major ’ s squadron . the solut he provid wa to have hungri joe fli the courier ship onc a week , remov him from the squadron for four night , and the remedi , like all colonel korn ’ s remedi , wa success . everi time colonel cathcart increas the number of mission and return hungri joe to combat duti , the nightmar stop and hungri joe settl down into a normal state of terror with a smile of relief . yossarian read hungri joe ’ s shrunken face like a headlin . it wa good when hungri joe look bad and terribl when hungri joe look good . hungri joe ’ s invert set of respons wa a curiou phenomenon to everyon but hungri joe , who deni the whole thing stubbornli . “ who dream ? ” he answer , when yossarian ask him what he dream about . “ joe , whi don ’ t you go see doc daneeka ? ” yossarian advis . “ whi should i go see doc daneeka ? i ’ m not sick. ” “ what about your nightmar ? ” “ i don ’ t have nightmar , ” hungri joe lie . “ mayb he can do someth about them. ” “ there ’ s noth wrong with nightmar , ” hungri joe answer . “ everybodi ha nightmares. ” yossarian thought he had him . “ everi night ? ” he ask . “ whi not everi night ? ” hungri joe demand . and suddenli it all made sens . whi not everi night , inde ? it made sens to cri out in pain everi night . it made more sens than applebi , who wa a stickler for regul and had order kraft to order yossarian to take hi atabrin tablet on the flight oversea after yossarian and applebi had stop talk to each other . hungri joe made more sens than kraft , too , who wa dead , dump unceremoni into doom over ferrara by an explod engin after yossarian took hi flight of six plane in over the target a second time . the group had miss the bridg at ferrara again for the seventh straight day with the bombsight that could put bomb into a pickl barrel at forti thousand feet , and one whole week had alreadi pass sinc colonel cathcart had volunt to have hi men destroy the bridg in twenty-four hour . kraft wa a skinni , harmless kid from pennsylvania who want onli to be like , and wa destin to be disappoint in even so humbl and degrad an ambit . instead of be like , he wa dead , a bleed cinder on the barbar pile whom nobodi had heard in those last preciou moment while the plane with one wing plummet . he had live innocu for a littl while and then had gone down in flame over ferrara on the seventh day , while god wa rest , when mcwatt turn and yossarian guid him in over the target on a second bomb run becaus aarfi wa confus and yossarian had been unabl to drop hi bomb the first time . “ i guess we do have to go back again , don ’ t we ? ” mcwatt had said somberli over the intercom . “ i guess we do , ” said yossarian . “ do we ? ” said mcwatt . “ yeah. ” “ oh , well , ” sang mcwatt , “ what the hell. ” and back they had gone while the plane in the other flight circl safe off in the distanc and everi crash cannon in the hermann goer divis below wa busi crash shell thi time onli at them . colonel cathcart had courag and never hesit to volunt hi men for ani target avail . no target wa too danger for hi group to attack , just as no shot wa too difficult for applebi to handl on the ping-pong tabl . applebi wa a good pilot and a superhuman ping-pong player with fli in hi eye who never lost a point . twenty-on serv were all it ever took for applebi to disgrac anoth oppon . hi prowess on the ping-pong tabl wa legendari , and applebi won everi game he start until the night orr got tipsi on gin and juic and smash open applebi ’ s forehead with hi paddl after applebi had smash back each of orr ’ s first five serv . orr leap on top of the tabl after hurl hi paddl and came sail off the other end in a run broad jump with both feet plant squar in applebi ’ s face . pandemonium broke loos . it took almost a full minut for applebi to disentangl himself from orr ’ s flail arm and leg and grope hi way to hi feet , with orr held off the ground befor him by the shirt front in one hand and hi other arm drawn back in a fist to smite him dead , and at that moment yossarian step forward and took orr away from him . it wa a night of surpris for applebi , who wa as larg as yossarian and as strong and who swung at yossarian as hard as he could with a punch that flood chief white halfoat with such joyou excit that he turn and bust colonel moodu in the nose with a punch that fill gener dreedl with such mellow gratif that he had colonel cathcart throw the chaplain out of the offic ’ club and order chief white halfoat move into doc daneeka ’ s tent , where he could be under a doctor ’ s care twenty-four hour a day and be kept in good enough physic condit to bust colonel moodu in the nose again whenev gener dreedl want him to . sometim gener dreedl made special trip down from wing headquart with colonel moodu and hi nurs just to have chief white halfoat bust hi son-in-law in the nose . chief white halfoat would much rather have remain in the trailer he share with captain flume , the silent , haunt squadron public-rel offic who spent most of each even develop the pictur he took dure the day to be sent out with hi public releas . captain flume spent as much of each even as he could work in hi darkroom and then lay down on hi cot with hi finger cross and a rabbit ’ s foot around hi neck and tri with all hi might to stay awak . he live in mortal fear of chief white halfoat . captain flume wa obsess with the idea that chief white halfoat would tipto up to hi cot one night when he wa sound asleep and slit hi throat open for him from ear to ear . captain flume had obtain thi idea from chief white halfoat himself , who did tipto up to hi cot one night as he wa doze off , to hiss portent that one night when he , captain flume , wa sound asleep he , chief white halfoat , wa go to slit hi throat open for him from ear to ear . captain flume turn to ice , hi eye , flung open wide , stare directli up into chief white halfoat ’ s , glint drunkenli onli inch away . “ whi ? ” captain flume manag to croak final . “ whi not ? ” wa chief white halfoat ’ s answer . each night after that , captain flume forc himself to keep awak as long as possibl . he wa aid immeasur by hungri joe ’ s nightmar . listen so intent to hungri joe ’ s maniac howl night after night , captain flume grew to hate him and began wish that chief white halfoat would tipto up to hi cot one night and slit hi throat open for him from ear to ear . actual , captain flume slept like a log most night and mere dream he wa awak . so convinc were these dream of lie awak that he woke from them each morn in complet exhaust and fell right back to sleep . chief white halfoat had grown almost fond of captain flume sinc hi amaz metamorphosi . captain flume had enter hi bed that night a buoyant extrovert and left it the next morn a brood introvert , and chief white halfoat proudli regard the new captain flume as hi own creation . he had never intend to slit captain flume ’ s throat open for him from ear to ear . threaten to do so wa mere hi idea of a joke , like die of pneumonia , bust colonel moodu in the nose or challeng doc daneeka to indian wrestl . all chief white halfoat want to do when he stagger in drunk each night wa go right to sleep , and hungri joe often made that imposs . hungri joe ’ s nightmar gave chief white halfoat the heebie-jeebi , and he often wish that someon would tipto into hungri joe ’ s tent , lift hupl ’ s cat off hi face and slit hi throat open for him from ear to ear , so that everybodi in the squadron but captain flume could get a good night ’ s sleep . even though chief white halfoat kept bust colonel moodu in the nose for gener dreedl ’ s benefit , he wa still outsid the pale . also outsid the pale wa major major , the squadron command , who had found that out the same time he found out that he wa squadron command from colonel cathcart , who came blast into the squadron in hi hopped-up jeep the day after major duluth wa kill over perugia . colonel cathcart slam to a screech stop inch short of the railroad ditch separ the nose of hi jeep from the lopsid basketbal court on the other side , from which major major wa eventu driven by the kick and shove and stone and punch of the men who had almost becom hi friend . “ you ’ re the new squadron command , ” colonel cathcart had bellow across the ditch at him . “ but don ’ t think it mean anyth , becaus it doesn ’ t . all it mean is that you ’ re the new squadron commander. ” and colonel cathcart had roar away as abruptli as he ’ d come , whip the jeep around with a viciou spin of wheel that sent a spray of fine grit blow into major major ’ s face . major major wa immobil by the news . he stood speechless , lanki and gawk , with a scuf basketbal in hi long hand as the seed of rancor sown so swiftli by colonel cathcart took root in the soldier around him who had been play basketbal with him and who had let him come as close to make friend with them as anyon had ever let him come befor . the white of hi mooni eye grew larg and misti as hi mouth struggl yearningli and lost against the familiar , impregn loneli drift in around him again like suffoc fog . like all the other offic at group headquart except major danbi , colonel cathcart wa infus with the democrat spirit : he believ that all men were creat equal , and he therefor spurn all men outsid group headquart with equal fervor . nevertheless , he believ in hi men . as he told them frequent in the brief room , he believ they were at least ten mission better than ani other outfit and felt that ani who did not share thi confid he had place in them could get the hell out . the onli way they could get the hell out , though , as yossarian learn when he flew to visit ex-p.f.c . wintergreen , wa by fli the extra ten mission . “ i still don ’ t get it , ” yossarian protest . “ is doc daneeka right or isn ’ t he ? ” “ how mani did he say ? ” “ forty. ” “ daneeka wa tell the truth , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen admit . “ forti mission is all you have to fli as far as twenty-seventh air forc headquart is concerned. ” yossarian wa jubil . “ then i can go home , right ? i ’ ve got forty-eight. ” “ no , you can ’ t go home , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen correct him . “ are you crazi or someth ? ” “ whi not ? ” “ catch-22. ” “ catch-22 ? ” yossarian wa stun . “ what the hell ha catch-22 got to do with it ? ” “ catch-22 , ” doc daneeka answer patient , when hungri joe had flown yossarian back to pianosa , “ say you ’ ve alway got to do what your command offic tell you to. ” “ but twenty-seventh air forc say i can go home with forti missions. ” “ but they don ’ t say you have to go home . and regul do say you have to obey everi order . that ’ s the catch . even if the colonel were disobey a twenty-seventh air forc order by make you fli more mission , you ’ d still have to fli them , or you ’ d be guilti of disobey an order of hi . and then twenty-seventh air forc headquart would realli jump on you. ” yossarian slump with disappoint . “ then i realli have to fli the fifti mission , don ’ t i ? ” he griev . “ the fifty-f , ” doc daneeka correct him . “ what fifty-f ? ” “ the fifty-f mission the colonel now want all of you to fly. ” hungri joe heav a huge sigh of relief when he heard doc daneeka and broke into a grin . yossarian grab hungri joe by the neck and made him fli them both right back to ex-p.f.c . wintergreen . “ what would they do to me , ” he ask in confidenti tone , “ if i refus to fli them ? ” “ we ’ d probabl shoot you , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen repli . “ we ? ” yossarian cri in surpris . “ what do you mean , we ? sinc when are you on their side ? ” “ if you ’ re go to be shot , whose side do you expect me to be on ? ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen retort . yossarian winc . colonel cathcart had rais him again . 7 mcwatt ordinarili , yossarian ’ s pilot wa mcwatt , who , shave in loud red , clean pajama outsid hi tent each morn , wa one of the odd , iron , incomprehens thing surround yossarian . mcwatt wa the craziest combat man of them all probabl , becaus he wa perfectli sane and still did not mind the war . he wa a short-leg , wide-should , smile young soul who whistl bounci show tune continu and turn over card with sharp snap when he dealt at blackjack or poker until hungri joe disintegr into quak despair final beneath their cumul impact and began rant at him to stop snap the card . “ you son of a bitch , you onli do it becaus it hurt me , ” hungri joe would yell furious , as yossarian held him back soothingli with one hand . “ that ’ s the onli reason he doe it , becaus he like to hear me scream-you goddam son of a bitch ! ” mcwatt crinkl hi fine , freckl nose apologet and vow not to snap the card ani more , but alway forgot . mcwatt wore fleeci bedroom slipper with hi red pajama and slept between freshli press color bedsheet like the one milo had retriev half of for him from the grin thief with the sweet tooth in exchang for none of the pit date milo had borrow from yossarian . mcwatt wa deepli impress with milo , who , to the amus of corpor snark , hi mess sergeant , wa alreadi buy egg for seven cent apiec and sell them for five cent . but mcwatt wa never as impress with milo as milo had been with the letter yossarian had obtain for hi liver from doc daneeka . “ what ’ s thi ? ” milo had cri out in alarm , when he came upon the enorm corrug carton fill with packag of dri fruit and can of fruit juic and dessert that two of the italian labor major -- de coverley had kidnap for hi kitchen were about to carri off to yossarian ’ s tent . “ thi is captain yossarian , sir , ” said corpor snark with a superior smirk . corpor snark wa an intellectu snob who felt he wa twenti year ahead of hi time and did not enjoy cook down to the mass . “ he ha a letter from doc daneeka entitl him to all the fruit and fruit juic he wants. ” “ what ’ s thi ? ” cri out yossarian , as milo went white and began to sway . “ thi is lieuten milo minderbind , sir , ” said corpor snark with a deris wink . “ one of our new pilot . he becam mess offic while you were in the hospit thi last time. ” “ what ’ s thi ? ” cri out mcwatt , late in the afternoon , as milo hand him half hi bedsheet . “ it ’ s half of the bedsheet that wa stolen from your tent thi morn , ” milo explain with nervou self-satisfact , hi rusti mustach twitch rapidli . “ i ’ ll bet you didn ’ t even know it wa stolen. ” “ whi should anyon want to steal half a bedsheet ? ” yossarian ask . milo grew fluster . “ you don ’ t understand , ” he protest . and yossarian also did not understand whi milo need so desper to invest in the letter from doc daneeka , which came right to the point . “ give yossarian all the dri fruit and fruit juic he want , ” doc daneeka had written . “ he say he ha a liver condition. ” “ a letter like thi , ” milo mumbl despond , “ could ruin ani mess offic in the world. ” milo had come to yossarian ’ s tent just to read the letter again , follow hi carton of lost provis across the squadron like a mourner . “ i have to give you as much as you ask for . whi , the letter doesn ’ t even say you have to eat all of it yourself. ” “ and it ’ s a good thing it doesn ’ t , ” yossarian told him , “ becaus i never eat ani of it . i have a liver condition. ” “ oh , ye , i forgot , ” said milo , in a voic lower deferenti . “ is it bad ? ” “ just bad enough , ” yossarian answer cheer . “ i see , ” said milo . “ what doe that mean ? ” “ it mean that it couldn ’ t be better… ” “ i don ’ t think i understand. ” “ …without be wors . now do you see ? ” “ ye , now i see . but i still don ’ t think i understand. ” “ well , don ’ t let it troubl you . let it troubl me . you see , i don ’ t realli have a liver condit . i ’ ve just got the symptom . i have a garnett-fleischak syndrome. ” “ i see , ” said milo . “ and what is a garnett-fleischak syndrom ? ” “ a liver condition. ” “ i see , ” said milo , and began massag hi black eyebrow togeth wearili with an express of interior pain , as though wait for some sting discomfort he wa experienc to go away . “ in that case , ” he continu final , “ i suppos you do have to be veri care about what you eat , don ’ t you ? . “ veri care inde , ” yossarian told him . “ a good garnett-fleischak syndrom isn ’ t easi to come by , and i don ’ t want to ruin mine . that ’ s whi i never eat ani fruit. ” “ now i do see , ” said milo . “ fruit is bad for your liver ? ” “ no , fruit is good for my liver . that ’ s whi i never eat any. ” “ then what do you do with it ? ” demand milo , plod along doggedli through hi mount confus to fling out the question burn on hi lip . “ do you sell it ? ” “ i give it away. ” “ to who ? ” cri milo , in a voic crack with dismay . “ to anyon who want it , ” yossarian shout back . milo let out a long , melancholi wail and stagger back , bead of perspir pop out suddenli all over hi ashen face . he tug on hi unfortun mustach absent , hi whole bodi trembl . “ i give a great deal of it to dunbar , ” yossarian went on . “ dunbar ? ” milo echo numbl . “ ye . dunbar can eat all the fruit he want and it won ’ t do him a damn bit of good . i just leav the carton right out there in the open for anyon who want ani to come and help himself . aarfi come here to get prune becaus he say he never get enough prune in the mess hall . you might look into that when you ’ ve got some time becaus it ’ s no fun have aarfi hang around here . whenev the suppli run low i just have corpor snark fill me up again . nate alway take a whole load of fruit along with him whenev he goe to rome . he ’ s in love with a whore there who hate me and isn ’ t at all interest in him . she ’ s got a kid sister who never leav them alon in bed togeth , and they live in an apart with an old man and woman and a bunch of other girl with nice fat thigh who are alway kid around also . nate bring them a whole carton everi time he goes. ” “ doe he sell it to them ? ” “ no , he give it to them. ” milo frown . “ well , i suppos that ’ s veri gener of him , ” he remark with no enthusiasm . “ ye , veri gener , ” yossarian agre . “ and i ’ m sure it ’ s perfectli legal , ” said milo , “ sinc the food is your onc you get it from me . i suppos that with condit as hard as they are , these peopl are veri glad to get it. ” “ ye , veri glad , ” yossarian assur him . “ the two girl sell it all on the black market and use the money to buy flashi costum jewelri and cheap perfume. ” milo perk up . “ costum jewelri ! ” he exclaim . “ i didn ’ t know that . how much are they pay for cheap perfum ? ” “ the old man use hi share to buy raw whiskey and dirti pictur . he ’ s a lecher. ” “ a lecher ? ” “ you ’ d be surprised. ” “ is there much of a market in rome for dirti pictur ? ” milo ask . “ you ’ d be surpris . take aarfi , for instanc . know him , you ’ d never suspect , would you ? ” “ that he ’ s a lecher ? ” “ no , that he ’ s a navig . you know captain aardvaark , don ’ t you ? he ’ s that nice guy who came up to you your first day in the squadron and said , ‘ aardvaark ’ s my name , and navig is my game. ’ he wore a pipe in hi face and probabl ask you what colleg you went to . do you know him ? ” milo wa pay no attent . “ let me be your partner , ” he blurt out imploringli . yossarian turn him down , even though he had no doubt that the truckload of fruit would be their to dispos of ani way they saw fit onc yossarian had requisit them from the mess hall with doc daneeka ’ s letter . milo wa crestfallen , but from that moment on he trust yossarian with everi secret but one , reason shrewdli that anyon who would not steal from the countri he love would not steal from anybodi . milo trust yossarian with everi secret but the locat of the hole in the hill in which he began buri hi money onc he return from smyrna with hi planeload of fig and learn from yossarian that a c.i.d . man had come to the hospit . to milo , who had been gullibl enough to volunt for it , the posit of mess offic wa a sacr trust . “ i didn ’ t even realiz we weren ’ t serv enough prune , ” he had admit that first day . “ i suppos it ’ s becaus i ’ m still so new . i ’ ll rais the question with my first chef. ” yossarian eye him sharpli . “ what first chef ? ” he demand . “ you don ’ t have a first chef. ” “ corpor snark , ” milo explain , look away a littl guiltili . “ he ’ s the onli chef i have , so he realli is my first chef , although i hope to move him over to the administr side . corpor snark tend to be a littl too creativ , i feel . he think be a mess sergeant is some sort of art form and is alway complain about have to prostitut hi talent . nobodi is ask him to do ani such thing ! incident , do you happen to know whi he wa bust to privat and is onli a corpor now ? ” “ ye , ” said yossarian . “ he poison the squadron. ” milo went pale again . “ he did what ? ” “ he mash hundr of cake of gi soap into the sweet potato just to show that peopl have the tast of philistin and don ’ t know the differ between good and bad . everi man in the squadron wa sick . mission were canceled. ” “ well ! ” milo exclaim , with thin-up disapprov . “ he certainli found out how wrong he wa , didn ’ t he ? ” “ on the contrari , ” yossarian correct . “ he found out how right he wa . we pack it away by the plate and clamor for more . we all knew we were sick , but we had no idea we ’ d been poisoned. ” milo snif in constern twice , like a shaggi brown hare . “ in that case , i certainli do want to get him over to the administr side . i don ’ t want anyth like that happen while i ’ m in charg . you see , ” he confid earnestli , “ what i hope to do is give the men in thi squadron the best meal in the whole world . that ’ s realli someth to shoot at , isn ’ t it ? if a mess offic aim at anyth less , it seem to me , he ha no right be mess offic . don ’ t you agre ? ” yossarian turn slowli to gaze at milo with probe distrust . he saw a simpl , sincer face that wa incap of subtleti or guil , an honest , frank face with disunit larg eye , rusti hair , black eyebrow and an unfortun reddish-brown mustach . milo had a long , thin nose with snif , damp nostril head sharpli off to the right , alway point away from where the rest of him wa look . it wa the face of a man of harden integr who could no more conscious violat the moral principl on which hi virtu rest than he could transform himself into a despic toad . one of these moral principl wa that it wa never a sin to charg as much as the traffic would bear . he wa capabl of mighti paroxysm of righteou indign , and he wa indign as could be when he learn that a c.i.d . man wa in the area look for him . “ he ’ s not look for you , ” yossarian said , tri to placat him . “ he ’ s look for someon up in the hospit who ’ s been sign washington irv ’ s name to the letter he ’ s been censoring. ” “ i never sign washington irv ’ s name to ani letter , ” milo declar . “ of cours not. ” “ but that ’ s just a trick to get me to confess i ’ ve been make money in the black market. ” milo haul violent at a dishevel hunk of hi off-color mustach . “ i don ’ t like guy like that . alway snoop around peopl like us . whi doesn ’ t the govern get after ex-p.f.c . wintergreen , if it want to do some good ? he ’ s got no respect for rule and regul and keep cut price on me. ” milo ’ s mustach wa unfortun becaus the separ halv never match . they were like milo ’ s disunit eye , which never look at the same thing at the same time . milo could see more thing than most peopl , but he could see none of them too distinctli . in contrast to hi reaction to news of the c.i.d . man , he learn with calm courag from yossarian that colonel cathcart had rais the number of mission to fifty-f . “ we ’ re at war , ” he said . “ and there ’ s no use complain about the number of mission we have to fli . if the colonel say we have to fli fifty-f mission , we have to fli them. ” “ well , i don ’ t have to fli them , ” yossarian vow . “ i ’ ll go see major major. ” “ how can you ? major major never see anybody. ” “ then i ’ ll go back into the hospital. ” “ you just came out of the hospit ten day ago , ” milo remind him reprovingli . “ you can ’ t keep run into the hospit everi time someth happen you don ’ t like . no , the best thing to do is fli the mission . it ’ s our duty. ” milo had rigid scrupl that would not even allow him to borrow a packag of pit date from the mess hall that day of mcwatt ’ s stolen bedsheet , for the food at the mess hall wa all still the properti of the govern . “ but i can borrow it from you , ” he explain to yossarian , “ sinc all thi fruit is your onc you get it from me with doctor daneeka ’ s letter . you can do whatev you want to with it , even sell it at a high profit instead of give it away free . wouldn ’ t you want to do that togeth ? ” “ no. ” milo gave up . “ then lend me one packag of pit date , ” he request . “ i ’ ll give it back to you . i swear i will , and there ’ ll be a littl someth extra for you. ” milo prove good as hi word and hand yossarian a quarter of mcwatt ’ s yellow bedsheet when he return with the unopen packag of date and with the grin thief with the sweet tooth who had stolen the bedsheet from mcwatt ’ s tent . the piec of bedsheet now belong to yossarian . he had earn it while nap , although he did not understand how . neither did mcwatt . “ what ’ s thi ? ” cri mcwatt , stare in mystif at the rip half of hi bedsheet . “ it ’ s half of the bedsheet that wa stolen from your tent thi morn , ” milo explain . “ i ’ ll bet you didn ’ t even know it wa stolen. ” “ whi should anyon want to steal half a bedsheet ? ” yossarian ask . milo grew fluster . “ you don ’ t understand , ” he protest . “ he stole the whole bedsheet , and i got it back with the packag of pit date you invest . that ’ s whi the quarter of the bedsheet is your . you made a veri handsom return on your invest , particularli sinc you ’ ve gotten back everi pit date you gave me. ” milo next address himself to mcwatt . “ half the bedsheet is your becaus it wa all your to begin with , and i realli don ’ t understand what you ’ re complain about , sinc you wouldn ’ t have ani part of it if captain yossarian and i hadn ’ t interven in your behalf. ” “ who ’ s complain ? ” mcwatt exclaim . “ i ’ m just tri to figur out what i can do with half a bedsheet. ” “ there are lot of thing you can do with half a bedsheet , ” milo assur him . “ the remain quarter of the bedsheet i ’ ve set asid for myself as a reward for my enterpris , work and initi . it ’ s not for myself , you understand , but for the syndic . that ’ s someth you might do with half the bedsheet . you can leav it in the syndic and watch it grow. ” “ what syndic ? ” “ the syndic i ’ d like to form someday so that i can give you men the good food you deserve. ” “ you want to form a syndic ? ” “ ye , i do . no , a mart . do you know what a mart is ? ” “ it ’ s a place where you buy thing , isn ’ t it ? ” “ and sell thing , ” correct milo . “ and sell things. ” “ all my life i ’ ve want a mart . you can do lot of thing if you ’ ve got a mart . but you ’ ve got to have a mart. ” “ you want a mart ? ” “ and everi man will have a share. ” yossarian wa still puzzl , for it wa a busi matter , and there wa much about busi matter that alway puzzl him . “ let me tri to explain it again , ” milo offer with grow weari and exasper , jerk hi thumb toward the thief with the sweet tooth , still grin besid him . “ i knew he want the date more than the bedsheet . sinc he doesn ’ t understand a word of english , i made it a point to conduct the whole transact in english. ” “ whi didn ’ t you just hit him over the head and take the bedsheet away from him ? ” yossarian ask . press hi lip togeth with digniti , milo shook hi head . “ that would have been most unjust , ” he scold firmli . “ forc is wrong , and two wrong never make a right . it wa much better my way . when i held the date out to him and reach for the bedsheet , he probabl thought i wa offer to trade. ” “ what were you do ? ” “ actual , i wa offer to trade , but sinc he doesn ’ t understand english , i can alway deni it. ” “ suppos he get angri and want the date ? ” “ whi , we ’ ll just hit him over the head and take them away from him , ” milo answer without hesit . he look from yossarian to mcwatt and back again . “ i realli can ’ t see what everyon is complain about . we ’ re all much better off than befor . everybodi is happi but thi thief , and there ’ s no sens worri about him , sinc he doesn ’ t even speak our languag and deserv whatev he get . don ’ t you understand ? ” but yossarian still didn ’ t understand either how milo could buy egg in malta for seven cent apiec and sell them at a profit in pianosa for five cent . 8 lieuten scheisskopf not even cleving understood how milo could do that , and cleving knew everyth . cleving knew everyth about the war except whi yossarian had to die while corpor snark wa allow to live , or whi corpor snark had to die while yossarian wa allow to live . it wa a vile and muddi war , and yossarian could have live without it-liv forev , perhap . onli a fraction of hi countrymen would give up their live to win it , and it wa not hi ambit to be among them . to die or not to die , that wa the question , and cleving grew limp tri to answer it . histori did not demand yossarian ’ s prematur demis , justic could be satisfi without it , progress did not hing upon it , victori did not depend on it . that men would die wa a matter of necess ; which men would die , though , wa a matter of circumst , and yossarian wa will to be the victim of anyth but circumst . but that wa war . just about all he could find in it favor wa that it paid well and liber children from the pernici influenc of their parent . cleving knew so much becaus cleving wa a geniu with a pound heart and blanch face . he wa a gangl , gawki , feverish , famish-ey brain . as a harvard undergradu he had won prize in scholarship for just about everyth , and the onli reason he had not won prize in scholarship for everyth els wa that he wa too busi sign petit , circul petit and challeng petit , join discuss group and resign from discuss group , attend youth congress , picket other youth congress and organ student committe in defens of dismiss faculti member . everyon agre that cleving wa certain to go far in the academ world . in short , cleving wa one of those peopl with lot of intellig and no brain , and everyon knew it except those who soon found it out . in short , he wa a dope . he often look to yossarian like one of those peopl hang around modern museum with both eye togeth on one side of a face . it wa an illus , of cours , gener by cleving ’ s predilect for stare fixedli at one side of a question and never see the other side at all . polit , he wa a humanitarian who did know right from left and wa trap uncomfort between the two . he wa constantli defend hi communist friend to hi right-w enemi and hi right-w friend to hi communist enemi , and he wa thoroughli detest by both group , who never defend him to anyon becaus they thought he wa a dope . he wa a veri seriou , veri earnest and veri conscienti dope . it wa imposs to go to a movi with him without get involv afterward in a discuss on empathi , aristotl , univers , messag and the oblig of the cinema as an art form in a materialist societi . girl he took to the theater had to wait until the first intermiss to find out from him whether or not they were see a good or a bad play , and then found out at onc . he wa a milit idealist who crusad against racial bigotri by grow faint in it presenc . he knew everyth about literatur except how to enjoy it . yossarian tri to help him . “ don ’ t be a dope , ” he had counsel cleving when they were both at cadet school in santa ana , california . “ i ’ m go to tell him , ” cleving insist , as the two of them sat high in the review stand look down on the auxiliari paradeground at lieuten scheisskopf rage back and forth like a beardless lear . “ whi me ? ” lieuten scheisskopf wail . “ keep still , idiot , ” yossarian advis cleving avuncularli . “ you don ’ t know what you ’ re talk about , ” cleving object . “ i know enough to keep still , idiot. ” lieuten scheisskopf tore hi hair and gnash hi teeth . hi rubberi cheek shook with gust of anguish . hi problem wa a squadron of aviat cadet with low moral who march atroci in the parad competit that took place everi sunday afternoon . their moral wa low becaus they did not want to march in parad everi sunday afternoon and becaus lieuten scheisskopf had appoint cadet offic from their rank instead of permit them to elect their own . “ i want someon to tell me , ” lieuten scheisskopf beseech them all prayer . “ if ani of it is my fault , i want to be told. ” “ he want someon to tell him , ” cleving said . “ he want everyon to keep still , idiot , ” yossarian answer . “ didn ’ t you hear him ? ” cleving argu . “ i heard him , ” yossarian repli . “ i heard him say veri loudli and veri distinctli that he want everi one of us to keep our mouth shut if we know what ’ s good for us. ” “ i won ’ t punish you , ” lieuten scheisskopf swore . “ he say he won ’ t punish me , ” said cleving . “ he ’ ll castrat you , ” said yossarian . “ i swear i won ’ t punish you , ” said lieuten scheisskopf . “ i ’ ll be grate to the man who tell me the truth. ” “ he ’ ll hate you , ” said yossarian . “ to hi die day he ’ ll hate you. ” lieuten scheisskopf wa an r.o.t.c . graduat who wa rather glad that war had broken out , sinc it gave him an opportun to wear an offic ’ s uniform everi day and say “ men ” in a clip , militari voic to the bunch of kid who fell into hi clutch everi eight week on their way to the butcher ’ s block . he wa an ambiti and humorless lieuten scheisskopf , who confront hi respons soberli and smile onli when some rival offic at the santa ana armi air forc base came down with a linger diseas . he had poor eyesight and chronic sinu troubl , which made war especi excit for him , sinc he wa in no danger of go oversea . the best thing about him wa hi wife and the best thing about hi wife wa a girl friend name dori duz who did whenev she could and had a wac uniform that lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife put on everi weekend and took off everi weekend for everi cadet in her husband ’ s squadron who want to creep into her . dori duz wa a live littl tart of copper-green and gold who love do it best in toolsh , phone booth , field hous and bu kiosk . there wa littl she hadn ’ t tri and less she wouldn ’ t . she wa shameless , slim , nineteen and aggress . she destroy ego by the score and made men hate themselv in the morn for the way she found them , use them and toss them asid . yossarian love her . she wa a marvel piec of ass who found him onli fair . he love the feel of springi muscl beneath her skin everywher he touch her the onli time she ’ d let him . yossarian love dori duz so much that he couldn ’ t help fling himself down passion on top of lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife everi week to reveng himself upon lieuten scheisskopf for the way lieuten scheisskopf wa reveng himself upon cleving . lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife wa reveng herself upon lieuten scheisskopf for some unforgett crime of hi she couldn ’ t recal . she wa a plump , pink , sluggish girl who read good book and kept urg yossarian not to be so bourgeoi without the r. she wa never without a good book close by , not even when she wa lie in bed with noth on her but yossarian and dori duz ’ s dog tag . she bore yossarian , but he wa in love with her , too . she wa a crazi mathemat major from the wharton school of busi who could not count to twenty-eight each month without get into troubl . “ darl , we ’ re go to have a babi again , ” she would say to yossarian everi month . “ you ’ re out of your goddam head , ” he would repli . “ i mean it , babi , ” she insist . “ so do i. ” “ darl , we ’ re go to have a babi again , ” she would say to her husband . “ i haven ’ t the time , ” lieuten scheisskopf would grumbl petulantli . “ don ’ t you know there ’ s a parad go on ? ” lieuten scheisskopf care veri deepli about win parad and about bring cleving up on charg befor the action board for conspir to advoc the overthrow of the cadet offic lieuten scheisskopf had appoint . cleving wa a troublemak and a wise guy . lieuten scheisskopf knew that cleving might caus even more troubl if he wasn ’ t watch . yesterday it wa the cadet offic ; tomorrow it might be the world . cleving had a mind , and lieuten scheisskopf had notic that peopl with mind tend to get pretti smart at time . such men were danger , and even the new cadet offic whom cleving had help into offic were eager to give damn testimoni against him . the case against cleving wa open and shut . the onli thing miss wa someth to charg him with . it could not be anyth to do with parad , for cleving took the parad almost as serious as lieuten scheisskopf himself . the men fell out for the parad earli each sunday afternoon and grope their way into rank of twelv outsid the barrack . groan with hangov , they limp in step to their station on the main paradeground , where they stood motionless in the heat for an hour or two with the men from the sixti or seventi other cadet squadron until enough of them had collaps to call it a day . on the edg of the field stood a row of ambul and team of train stretcher bearer with walkie-talki . on the roof of the ambul were spotter with binocular . a talli clerk kept score . supervis thi entir phase of the oper wa a medic offic with a flair for account who okay puls and check the figur of the talli clerk . as soon as enough unconsci men had been collect in the ambul , the medic offic signal the bandmast to strike up the band and end the parad . one behind the other , the squadron march up the field , execut a cumbersom turn around the review stand and march down the field and back to their barrack . each of the parad squadron wa grade as it march past the review stand , where a bloat colonel with a big fat mustach sat with the other offic . the best squadron in each wing won a yellow pennant on a pole that wa utterli worthless . the best squadron on the base won a red pennant on a longer pole that wa worth even less , sinc the pole wa heavier and wa that much more of a nuisanc to lug around all week until some other squadron won it the follow sunday . to yossarian , the idea of pennant as prize wa absurd . no money went with them , no class privileg . like olymp medal and tenni trophi , all they signifi wa that the owner had done someth of no benefit to anyon more capabl than everyon els . the parad themselv seem equal absurd . yossarian hate a parad . parad were so martial . he hate hear them , hate see them , hate be tie up in traffic by them . he hate be made to take part in them . it wa bad enough be an aviat cadet without have to act like a soldier in the blister heat everi sunday afternoon . it wa bad enough be an aviat cadet becaus it wa obviou now that the war would not be over befor he had finish hi train . that wa the onli reason he had volunt for cadet train in the first place . as a soldier who had qualifi for aviat cadet train , he had week and week of wait for assign to a class , week and week more to becom a bombardier-navig , week and week more of oper train after that to prepar him for oversea duti . it seem inconceiv then that the war could last that long , for god wa on hi side , he had been told , and god , he had also been told , could do whatev he want to . but the war wa not nearli over , and hi train wa almost complet . lieuten scheisskopf long desper to win parad and sat up half the night work on it while hi wife wait amor for him in bed thumb through krafft-eb to her favorit passag . he read book on march . he manipul box of chocol soldier until they melt in hi hand and then maneuv in rank of twelv a set of plastic cowboy he had bought from a mail-ord hous under an assum name and kept lock away from everyon ’ s eye dure the day . leonardo ’ s exercis in anatomi prove indispens . one even he felt the need for a live model and direct hi wife to march around the room . “ nake ? ” she ask hope . lieuten scheisskopf smack hi hand over hi eye in exasper . it wa the despair of lieuten scheisskopf ’ s life to be chain to a woman who wa incap of look beyond her own dirti , sexual desir to the titan struggl for the unattain in which nobl man could becom heroic engag . “ whi don ’ t you ever whip me ? ” she pout one night . “ becaus i haven ’ t the time , ” he snap at her impati . “ i haven ’ t the time . don ’ t you know there ’ s a parad go on ? ” and he realli did not have the time . there it wa sunday alreadi , with onli seven day left in the week to get readi for the next parad . he had no idea where the hour went . finish last in three success parad had given lieuten scheisskopf an unsavori reput , and he consid everi mean of improv , even nail the twelv men in each rank to a long two-by-four beam of season oak to keep them in line . the plan wa not feasibl , for make a ninety-degre turn would have been imposs without nickel-alloy swivel insert in the small of everi man ’ s back , and lieuten scheisskopf wa not sanguin at all about obtain that mani nickel-alloy swivel from quartermast or enlist the cooper of the surgeon at the hospit . the week after lieuten scheisskopf follow cleving ’ s recommend and let the men elect their own cadet offic , the squadron won the yellow pennant . lieuten scheisskopf wa so elat by hi unexpect achiev that he gave hi wife a sharp crack over the head with the pole when she tri to drag him into bed to celebr by show their contempt for the sexual more of the lower middl class in western civil . the next week the squadron won the red flag , and lieuten scheisskopf wa besid himself with raptur . and the week after that hi squadron made histori by win the red pennant two week in a row ! now lieuten scheisskopf had confid enough in hi power to spring hi big surpris . lieuten scheisskopf had discov in hi extens research that the hand of marcher , instead of swing freeli , as wa then the popular fashion , ought never to be move more than three inch from the center of the thigh , which meant , in effect , that they were scarc to be swung at all . lieuten scheisskopf ’ s prepar were elabor and clandestin . all the cadet in hi squadron were sworn to secreci and rehears in the dead of night on the auxiliari parade-ground . they march in dark that wa pitch and bump into each other blindli , but they did not panic , and they were learn to march without swing their hand . lieuten scheisskopf ’ s first thought had been to have a friend of hi in the sheet metal shop sink peg of nickel alloy into each man ’ s thighbon and link them to the wrist by strand of copper wire with exactli three inch of play , but there wasn ’ t time-ther wa never enough time-and good copper wire wa hard to come by in wartim . he rememb also that the men , so hamper , would be unabl to fall properli dure the impress faint ceremoni preced the march and that an inabl to faint properli might affect the unit ’ s rate as a whole . and all week long he chortl with repress delight at the offic ’ club . specul grew rampant among hi closest friend . “ i wonder what that shithead is up to , ” lieuten engl said . lieuten scheisskopf respond with a know smile to the queri of hi colleagu . “ you ’ ll find out sunday , ” he promis . “ you ’ ll find out. ” lieuten scheisskopf unveil hi epoch surpris that sunday with all the aplomb of an experienc impresario . he said noth while the other squadron ambl past the review stand crookedli in their customari manner . he gave no sign even when the first rank of hi own squadron hove into sight with their swingless march and the first stricken gasp of alarm were hiss from hi startl fellow offic . he held back even then until the bloat colonel with the big fat mustach whirl upon him savag with a purpl face , and then he offer the explan that made him immort . “ look , colonel , ” he announc . “ no hands. ” and to an audienc still with awe , he distribut certifi photostat copi of the obscur regul on which he had built hi unforgett triumph . thi wa lieuten scheisskopf ’ s finest hour . he won the parad , of cours , hand down , obtain perman possess of the red pennant and end the sunday parad altogeth , sinc good red pennant were as hard to come by in wartim as good copper wire . lieuten scheisskopf wa made first lieuten scheisskopf on the spot and began hi rapid rise through the rank . there were few who did not hail him as a true militari geniu for hi import discoveri . “ that lieuten scheisskopf , ” lieuten travel remark . “ he ’ s a militari genius. ” “ ye , he realli is , ” lieuten engl agre . “ it ’ s a piti the schmuck won ’ t whip hi wife. ” “ i don ’ t see what that ha to do with it , ” lieuten traver answer coolli . “ lieuten bemi whip mrs. bemi beauti everi time they have sexual intercours , and he isn ’ t worth a farth at parades. ” “ i ’ m talk about flagel , ” lieuten engl retort . “ who give a damn about parad ? ” actual , no one but lieuten scheisskopf realli gave a damn about the parad , least of all the bloat colonel with the big fat mustach , who wa chairman of the action board and began bellow at cleving the moment cleving step gingerli into the room to plead innoc to the charg lieuten scheisskopf had lodg against him . the colonel beat hi fist down upon the tabl and hurt hi hand and becam so further enrag with cleving that he beat hi fist down upon the tabl even harder and hurt hi hand some more . lieuten scheisskopf glare at cleving with tight lip , mortifi by the poor impress cleving wa make . “ in sixti day you ’ ll be fight billi petrol , ” the colonel with the big fat mustach roar . “ and you think it ’ s a big fat joke. ” “ i don ’ t think it ’ s a joke , sir , ” cleving repli . “ don ’ t interrupt. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ and say ‘ sir ’ when you do , ” order major metcalf . “ ye , sir. ” “ weren ’ t you just order not to interrupt ? ” major metcalf inquir coldli . “ but i didn ’ t interrupt , sir , ” cleving protest . “ no . and you didn ’ t say ‘ sir , ’ either . add that to the charg against him , ” major metcalf direct the corpor who could take shorthand . “ failur to say ‘ sir ’ to superior offic when not interrupt them. ” “ metcalf , ” said the colonel , “ you ’ re a goddam fool . do you know that ? ” major metcalf swallow with difficulti . “ ye , sir. ” “ then keep your goddam mouth shut . you don ’ t make sense. ” there were three member of the action board , the bloat colonel with the big fat mustach , lieuten scheisskopf and major metcalf , who wa tri to develop a steeli gaze . as a member of the action board , lieuten scheisskopf wa one of the judg who would weigh the merit of the case against cleving as present by the prosecutor . lieuten scheisskopf wa also the prosecutor . cleving had an offic defend him . the offic defend him wa lieuten scheisskopf . it wa all veri confus to cleving , who began vibrat in terror as the colonel surg to hi feet like a gigant belch and threaten to rip hi stink , cowardli bodi apart limb from limb . one day he had stumbl while march to class ; the next day he wa formal charg with “ break rank while in format , feloni assault , indiscrimin behavior , moperi , high treason , provok , be a smart guy , listen to classic music and so on ” . in short , they threw the book at him , and there he wa , stand in dread befor the bloat colonel , who roar onc more that in sixti day he would be fight billi petrol and demand to know how the hell he would like be wash out and ship to the solomon island to buri bodi . cleving repli with courtesi that he would not like it ; he wa a dope who would rather be a corps than buri one . the colonel sat down and settl back , calm and cagey suddenli , and ingratiatingli polit . “ what did you mean , ” he inquir slowli , “ when you said we couldn ’ t punish you ? ” “ when , sir ? ” “ i ’ m ask the question . you ’ re answer them. ” “ ye , sir . i- “ “ did you think we brought you here to ask question and for me to answer them ? ” “ no , sir . i- “ “ what did we bring you here for ? ” “ to answer questions. ” “ you ’ re goddam right , ” roar the colonel . “ now suppos you start answer some befor i break your goddam head . just what the hell did you mean , you bastard , when you said we couldn ’ t punish you ? ” “ i don ’ t think i ever made that statement , sir. ” “ will you speak up , pleas ? i couldn ’ t hear you. ” “ ye , sir . i- “ “ will you speak up , pleas ? he couldn ’ t hear you. ” “ ye , sir . i- “ “ metcalf. ” “ sir ? ” “ didn ’ t i tell you to keep your stupid mouth shut ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ then keep your stupid mouth shut when i tell you to keep your stupid mouth shut . do you understand ? will you speak up , pleas ? i couldn ’ t hear you. ” “ ye , sir . i- “ “ metcalf , is that your foot i ’ m step on ? ” “ no , sir . it must be lieuten scheisskopf ’ s foot. ” “ it isn ’ t my foot , ” said lieuten scheisskopf . “ then mayb it is my foot after all , ” said major metcalf . “ move it. ” “ ye , sir . you ’ ll have to move your foot first , colonel . it ’ s on top of mine. ” “ are you tell me to move my foot ? ” “ no , sir . oh , no , sir. ” “ then move your foot and keep your stupid mouth shut . will you speak up , pleas ? i still couldn ’ t hear you. ” “ ye , sir . i said that i didn ’ t say that you couldn ’ t punish me. ” “ just what the hell are you talk about ? ” “ i ’ m answer your question , sir. ” “ what question ? ” “ ’ just what the hell did you mean , you bastard , when you said we couldn ’ t punish you ? ’ ” said the corpor who could take shorthand , read from hi steno pad . “ all right , ” said the colonel . “ just what the hell did you mean ? ” “ i didn ’ t say you couldn ’ t punish me , sir. ” “ when ? ” ask the colonel . “ when what , sir ? ” “ now you ’ re ask me question again. ” “ i ’ m sorri , sir . i ’ m afraid i don ’ t understand your question. ” “ when didn ’ t you say we couldn ’ t punish you ? don ’ t you understand my question ? ” “ no , sir . i don ’ t understand. ” “ you ’ ve just told us that . now suppos you answer my question. ” “ but how can i answer it ? ” “ that ’ s anoth question you ’ re ask me. ” “ i ’ m sorri , sir . but i don ’ t know how to answer it . i never said you couldn ’ t punish me. ” “ now you ’ re tell us when you did say it . i ’ m ask you to tell us when you didn ’ t say it. ” cleving took a deep breath . “ i alway didn ’ t say you couldn ’ t punish me , sir. ” “ that ’ s much better , mr. cleving , even though it is a barefac lie . last night in the latrin . didn ’ t you whisper that we couldn ’ t punish you to that other dirti son of a bitch we don ’ t like ? what ’ s hi name ? ” “ yossarian , sir , ” lieuten scheisskopf said . “ ye , yossarian . that ’ s right . yossarian . yossarian ? is that hi name ? yossarian ? what the hell kind of a name is yossarian ? ” lieuten scheisskopf had the fact at hi fingertip . “ it ’ s yossarian ’ s name , sir , ” he explain . “ ye , i suppos it is . didn ’ t you whisper to yossarian that we couldn ’ t punish you ? ” “ oh , no , sir . i whisper to him that you couldn ’ t find me guilty- “ “ i may be stupid , ” interrupt the colonel , “ but the distinct escap me . i guess i am pretti stupid , becaus the distinct escap me. ” “ w- “ “ you ’ re a windi son of a bitch , aren ’ t you ? nobodi ask you for clarif and you ’ re give me clarif . i wa make a statement , not ask for clarif . you are a windi son of a bitch , aren ’ t you ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ no , sir ? are you call me a goddam liar ? ” “ oh , no , sir. ” “ then you ’ re a windi son of a bitch , aren ’ t you ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ are you a windi son of a bitch ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ goddammit , you are tri to pick a fight with me . for two stink cent i ’ d jump over thi big fat tabl and rip your stink , cowardli bodi apart limb from limb. ” “ do it ! do it ! ” cri major metcalf “ metcalf , you stink son of a bitch . didn ’ t i tell you to keep your stink , cowardli , stupid mouth shut ? ” “ ye , sir . i ’ m sorri , sir. ” “ then suppos you do it. ” “ i wa onli tri to learn , sir . the onli way a person can learn is by trying. ” “ who say so ? ” “ everybodi say so , sir . even lieuten scheisskopf say so. ” “ do you say so ? ” “ ye , sir , ” said lieuten scheisskopf . “ but everybodi say so. ” “ well , metcalf , suppos you tri keep that stupid mouth of your shut , and mayb that ’ s the way you ’ ll learn how . now , where were we ? read me back the last line. ” “ ’ read me back the last line , ’ ” read back the corpor who could take shorthand . “ not my last line , stupid ! ” the colonel shout . “ somebodi els ’ s. ” “ ’ read me back the last line , ’ ” read back the corpor . “ that ’ s my last line again ! ” shriek the colonel , turn purpl with anger . “ oh , no , sir , ” correct the corpor . “ that ’ s my last line . i read it to you just a moment ago . don ’ t you rememb , sir ? it wa onli a moment ago. ” “ oh , my god ! read me back hi last line , stupid . say , what the hell ’ s your name , anyway ? ” “ popinjay , sir. ” “ well , you ’ re next , popinjay . as soon as hi trial end , your trial begin . get it ? ” “ ye , sir . what will i be charg with ? ” “ what the hell differ doe that make ? did you hear what he ask me ? you ’ re go to learn , popinjay-th minut we finish with cleving you ’ re go to learn . cadet cleving , what did-you are cadet cleving , aren ’ t you , and not popinjay ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ good . what did- “ “ i ’ m popinjay , sir. ” “ popinjay , is your father a millionair , or a member of the senat ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ then you ’ re up shit creek , popinjay , without a paddl . he ’ s not a gener or a high-rank member of the administr , is he ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ that ’ s good . what doe your father do ? ” “ he ’ s dead , sir. ” “ that ’ s veri good . you realli are up the creek , popinjay . is popinjay realli your name ? just what the hell kind of a name is popinjay anyway ? i don ’ t like it. ” “ it ’ s popinjay ’ s name , sir , ” lieuten scheisskopf explain . “ well , i don ’ t like it , popinjay , and i just can ’ t wait to rip your stink , cowardli bodi apart limb from limb . cadet cleving , will you pleas repeat what the hell it wa you did or didn ’ t whisper to yossarian late last night in the latrin ? ” “ ye , sir . i said that you couldn ’ t find me guilty- “ “ we ’ ll take it from there . precis what did you mean , cadet cleving , when you said we couldn ’ t find you guilti ? ” “ i didn ’ t say you couldn ’ t find me guilti , sir. ” “ when ? ” “ when what , sir ? ” “ goddammit , are you go to start pump me again ? ” “ no , sir . i ’ m sorri , sir. ” “ then answer the question . when didn ’ t you say we couldn ’ t find you guilti ? ” “ late last night in the latrin , sir. ” “ is that the onli time you didn ’ t say it ? ” “ no , sir . i alway didn ’ t say you couldn ’ t find me guilti , sir . what i did say to yossarian was- “ “ nobodi ask you what you did say to yossarian . we ask you what you didn ’ t say to him . we ’ re not at all interest in what you did say to yossarian . is that clear ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ then we ’ ll go on . what did you say to yossarian ? ” “ i said to him , sir , that you couldn ’ t find me guilti of the offens with which i am charg and still be faith to the caus of… ” “ of what ? you ’ re mumbling. ” “ stop mumbling. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ and mumbl ‘ sir ’ when you do. ” “ metcalf , you bastard ! ” “ ye , sir , ” mumbl cleving . “ of justic , sir . that you couldn ’ t find- “ “ justic ? ” the colonel wa astound . “ what is justic ? ” “ justic , sir- “ “ that ’ s not what justic is , ” the colonel jeer , and began pound the tabl again with hi big fat hand . “ that ’ s what karl marx is . i ’ ll tell you what justic is . justic is a knee in the gut from the floor on the chin at night sneaki with a knife brought up down on the magazin of a battleship sandbag underhand in the dark without a word of warn . garrot . that ’ s what justic is when we ’ ve all got to be tough enough and rough enough to fight billi petrol . from the hip . get it ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ don ’ t sir me ! ” “ ye , sir. ” “ and say ‘ sir ’ when you don ’ t , ” order major metcalf . cleving wa guilti , of cours , or he would not have been accus , and sinc the onli way to prove it wa to find him guilti , it wa their patriot duti to do so . he wa sentenc to walk fifty-seven punish tour . popinjay wa lock up to be taught a lesson , and major metcalf wa ship to the solomon island to buri bodi . a punish tour for cleving wa fifti minut of a weekend hour spent pace back and forth befor the provost marshal ’ s build with a ton of an unload rifl on hi shoulder . it wa all veri confus to cleving . there were mani strang thing take place , but the strangest of all , to cleving , wa the hatr , the brutal , uncloak , inexor hatr of the member of the action board , glaze their unforgiv express with a hard , vindict surfac , glow in their narrow eye malignantli like inextinguish coal . cleving wa stun to discov it . they would have lynch him if they could . they were three grown men and he wa a boy , and they hate him and wish him dead . they had hate him befor he came , hate him while he wa there , hate him after he left , carri their hatr for him away malignantli like some pamper treasur after they separ from each other and went to their solitud . yossarian had done hi best to warn him the night befor . “ you haven ’ t got a chanc , kid , ” he told him glumli . “ they hate jews. ” “ but i ’ m not jewish , ” answer cleving . “ it will make no differ , ” yossarian promis , and yossarian wa right . “ they ’ re after everybody. ” cleving recoil from their hatr as though from a blind light . these three men who hate him spoke hi languag and wore hi uniform , but he saw their loveless face set immut into cramp , mean line of hostil and understood instantli that nowher in the world , not in all the fascist tank or plane or submarin , not in the bunker behind the machin gun or mortar or behind the blow flame thrower , not even among all the expert gunner of the crack hermann goer antiaircraft divis or among the grisli conniv in all the beer hall in munich and everywher els , were there men who hate him more . 9 major major major major major major major major had had a difficult time from the start . like minniv cheevi , he had been born too late-exactli thirty-six hour too late for the physic well-b of hi mother , a gentl , ail woman who , after a full day and a half ’ s agoni in the rigor of childbirth , wa deplet of all resolv to pursu further the argument over the new child ’ s name . in the hospit corridor , her husband move ahead with the unsmil determin of someon who knew what he wa about . major major ’ s father wa a tower , gaunt man in heavi shoe and a black woolen suit . he fill out the birth certif without falter , betray no emot at all as he hand the complet form to the floor nurs . the nurs took it from him without comment and pad out of sight . he watch her go , wonder what she had on underneath . back in the ward , he found hi wife lie vanquish beneath the blanket like a desicc old veget , wrinkl , dri and white , her enfeebl tissu absolut still . her bed wa at the veri end of the ward , near a crack window thicken with grime . rain splash from a moil sky and the day wa dreari and cold . in other part of the hospit chalki peopl with age , blue lip were die on time . the man stood erect besid the bed and gaze down at the woman a long time . “ i have name the boy caleb , ” he announc to her final in a soft voic . “ in accord with your wishes. ” the woman made no answer , and slowli the man smile . he had plan it all perfectli , for hi wife wa asleep and would never know that he had lie to her as she lay on her sickb in the poor ward of the counti hospit . from thi meager begin had sprung the ineffectu squadron command who wa now spend the better part of each work day in pianosa forg washington irv ’ s name to offici document . major major forg dilig with hi left hand to elud identif , insul against intrus by hi own undesir author and camouflag in hi fals mustach and dark glass as an addit safeguard against detect by anyon chanc to peer in through the dowdi celluloid window from which some thief had carv out a slice . in between these two low point of hi birth and hi success lay thirty-on dismal year of loneli and frustrat . major major had been born too late and too mediocr . some men are born mediocr , some men achiev mediocr , and some men have mediocr thrust upon them . with major major it had been all three . even among men lack all distinct he inevit stood out as a man lack more distinct than all the rest , and peopl who met him were alway impress by how unimpress he wa . major major had three strike on him from the beginning-hi mother , hi father and henri fonda , to whom he bore a sickli resembl almost from the moment of hi birth . long befor he even suspect who henri fonda wa , he found himself the subject of unflatt comparison everywher he went . total stranger saw fit to deprec him , with the result that he wa stricken earli with a guilti fear of peopl and an obsequi impuls to apolog to societi for the fact that he wa not henri fonda . it wa not an easi task for him to go through life look someth like henri fonda , but he never onc thought of quit , have inherit hi persever from hi father , a lanki man with a good sens of humor . major major ’ s father wa a sober god-fear man whose idea of a good joke wa to lie about hi age . he wa a long-limb farmer , a god-fear , freedom-lov , law-abid rug individualist who held that feder aid to anyon but farmer wa creep social . he advoc thrift and hard work and disapprov of loos women who turn him down . hi specialti wa alfalfa , and he made a good thing out of not grow ani . the govern paid him well for everi bushel of alfalfa he did not grow . the more alfalfa he did not grow , the more money the govern gave him , and he spent everi penni he didn ’ t earn on new land to increas the amount of alfalfa he did not produc . major major ’ s father work without rest at not grow alfalfa . on long winter even he remain indoor and did not mend har , and he sprang out of bed at the crack of noon everi day just to make certain that the chore would not be done . he invest in land wise and soon wa not grow more alfalfa than ani other man in the counti . neighbor sought him out for advic on all subject , for he had made much money and wa therefor wise . “ as ye sow , so shall ye reap , ” he counsel one and all , and everyon said , “ amen. ” major major ’ s father wa an outspoken champion of economi in govern , provid it did not interfer with the sacr duti of govern to pay farmer as much as they could get for all the alfalfa they produc that no one els want or for not produc ani alfalfa at all . he wa a proud and independ man who wa oppos to unemploy insur and never hesit to whine , whimper , wheedl , and extort for as much as he could get from whomev he could . he wa a devout man whose pulpit wa everywher . “ the lord gave us good farmer two strong hand so that we could take as much as we could grab with both of them , ” he preach with ardor on the courthous step or in front of the a amp ; p as he wait for the bad-temp gum-chew young cashier he wa after to step outsid and give him a nasti look . “ if the lord didn ’ t want us to take as much as we could get , ” he preach , “ he wouldn ’ t have given us two good hand to take it with. ” and the other murmur , “ amen. ” major major ’ s father had a calvinist ’ s faith in predestin and could perceiv distinctli how everyon ’ s misfortun but hi own were express of god ’ s will . he smoke cigarett and drank whiskey , and he thrive on good wit and stimul intellectu convers , particularli hi own when he wa lie about hi age or tell that good one about god and hi wife ’ s difficulti in deliv major major . the good one about god and hi wife ’ s difficulti had to do with the fact that it had taken god onli six day to produc the whole world , wherea hi wife had spent a full day and a half in labor just to produc major major . a lesser man might have waver that day in the hospit corridor , a weaker man might have compromis on such excel substitut as drum major , minor major , sergeant major , or c. sharp major , but major major ’ s father had wait fourteen year for just such an opportun , and he wa not a person to wast it . major major ’ s father had a good joke about opportun . “ opportun onli knock onc in thi world , ” he would say . major major ’ s father repeat thi good joke at everi opportun . be born with a sickli resembl to henri fonda wa the first of along seri of practic joke of which destini wa to make major major the unhappi victim throughout hi joyless life . be born major major major wa the second . the fact that he had been born major major major wa a secret known onli to hi father . not until major major wa enrol in kindergarten wa the discoveri of hi real name made , and then the effect were disastr . the news kill hi mother , who just lost her will to live and wast away and die , which wa just fine with hi father , who had decid to marri the bad-temp girl at the a amp ; p if he had to and who had not been optimist about hi chanc of get hi wife off the land without pay her some money or flog her . on major major himself the consequ were onli slightli less sever . it wa a harsh and stun realiz that wa forc upon him at so tender an age , the realiz that he wa not , as he had alway been led to believ , caleb major , but instead wa some total stranger name major major major about whom he knew absolut noth and about whom nobodi els had ever heard befor . what playmat he had withdrew from him and never return , dispos , as they were , to distrust all stranger , especi one who had alreadi deceiv them by pretend to be someon they had known for year . nobodi would have anyth to do with him . he began to drop thing and to trip . he had a shi and hope manner in each new contact , and he wa alway disappoint . becaus he need a friend so desper , he never found one . he grew awkwardli into a tall , strang , dreami boy with fragil eye and a veri delic mouth whose tent , grope smile collaps instantli into hurt disord at everi fresh rebuff . he wa polit to hi elder , who dislik him . whatev hi elder told him to do , he did . they told him to look befor he leap , and he alway look befor he leap . they told him never to put off until the next day what he could do the day befor , and he never did . he wa told to honor hi father and hi mother , and he honor hi father and hi mother . he wa told that he should not kill , and he did not kill , until he got into the armi . then he wa told to kill , and he kill . he turn the other cheek on everi occas and alway did unto other exactli as he would have had other do unto him . when he gave to chariti , hi left hand never knew what hi right hand wa do . he never onc took the name of the lord hi god in vain , commit adulteri or covet hi neighbor ’ s ass . in fact , he love hi neighbor and never even bore fals wit against him . major major ’ s elder dislik him becaus he wa such a flagrant nonconformist . sinc he had noth better to do well in , he did well in school . at the state univers he took hi studi so serious that he wa suspect by the homosexu of be a communist and suspect by the communist of be a homosexu . he major in english histori , which wa a mistak . “ english histori ! ” roar the silver-man senior senat from hi state indignantli . “ what ’ s the matter with american histori ? american histori is as good as ani histori in the world ! ” major major switch immedi to american literatur , but not befor the f.b.i . had open a file on him . there were six peopl and a scotch terrier inhabit the remot farmhous major major call home , and five of them and the scotch terrier turn out to be agent for the f.b.i . soon they had enough derogatori inform on major major to do whatev they want to with him . the onli thing they could find to do with him , howev , wa take him into the armi as a privat and make him a major four day later so that congressmen with noth els on their mind could go trot back and forth through the street of washington , d.c. , chant , “ who promot major major ? who promot major major ? ” actual , major major had been promot by an i.b.m . machin with a sens of humor almost as keen as hi father ’ s . when war broke out , he wa still docil and compliant . they told him to enlist , and he enlist . they told him to appli for aviat cadet train , and he appli for aviat cadet train , and the veri next night found himself stand barefoot in ici mud at three o ’ clock in the morn befor a tough and belliger sergeant from the southwest who told them he could beat hell out of ani man in hi outfit and wa readi to prove it . the recruit in hi squadron had all been shaken roughli awak onli minut befor by the sergeant ’ s corpor and told to assembl in front of the administr tent . it wa still rain on major major . they fell into rank in the civilian cloth they had brought into the armi with them three day befor . those who had linger to put shoe and sock on were sent back to their cold , wet , dark tent to remov them , and they were all barefoot in the mud as the sergeant ran hi stoni eye over their face and told them he could beat hell out of ani man in hi outfit . no one wa inclin to disput him . major major ’ s unexpect promot to major the next day plung the belliger sergeant into a bottomless gloom , for he wa no longer abl to boast that he could beat hell out of ani man in hi outfit . he brood for hour in hi tent like saul , receiv no visitor , while hi elit guard of corpor stood discourag watch outsid . at three o ’ clock in the morn he found hi solut , and major major and the other recruit were again shaken roughli awak and order to assembl barefoot in the drizzli glare at the administr tent , where the sergeant wa alreadi wait , hi fist clench on hi hip cockili , so eager to speak that he could hardli wait for them to arriv . “ me and major major , ” he boast , in the same tough , clip tone of the night befor , “ can beat hell out of ani man in my outfit. ” the offic on the base took action on the major major problem later that same day . how could they cope with a major like major major ? to demean him person would be to demean all other offic of equal or lesser rank . to treat him with courtesi , on the other hand , wa unthink . fortun , major major had appli for aviat cadet train . order transfer him away were sent to the mimeograph room late in the afternoon , and at three o ’ clock in the morn major major wa again shaken roughli awak , bidden godspe by the sergeant and place aboard a plane head west . lieuten scheisskopf turn white as a sheet when major major report to him in california with bare feet and mudcak toe . major major had taken it for grant that he wa be shaken roughli awak again to stand barefoot in the mud and had left hi shoe and sock in the tent . the civilian cloth in which he report for duti to lieuten scheisskopf wa rumpl and dirti . lieuten scheisskopf , who had not yet made hi reput as a parad , shudder violent at the pictur major major would make march barefoot in hi squadron that come sunday . “ go to the hospit quickli , ” he mumbl , when he had recov suffici to speak , “ and tell them you ’ re sick . stay there until your allow for uniform catch up with you and you have some money to buy some cloth . and some shoe . buy some shoes. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ i don ’ t think you have to call me ‘ sir , ’ sir , ” lieuten scheisskopf point out . “ you outrank me. ” “ ye , sir . i may outrank you , sir , but you ’ re still my command officer. ” “ ye , sir , that ’ s right , ” lieuten scheisskopf agre . “ you may outrank me , sir , but i ’ m still your command offic . so you better do what i tell you , sir , or you ’ ll get into troubl . go to the hospit and tell them you ’ re sick , sir . stay there until your uniform allow catch up with you and you have some money to buy some uniforms. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ and some shoe , sir . buy some shoe the first chanc you get , sir. ” “ ye , sir . i will , sir. ” “ thank you , sir. ” life in cadet school for major major wa no differ than life had been for him all along . whoever he wa with alway want him to be with someon els . hi instructor gave him prefer treatment at everi stage in order to push him along quickli and be rid of him . in almost no time he had hi pilot ’ s wing and found himself oversea , where thing began suddenli to improv . all hi life , major major had long for but one thing , to be absorb , and in pianosa , for a while , he final wa . rank meant littl to the men on combat duti , and relat between offic and enlist men were relax and inform . men whose name he didn ’ t even know said “ hi ” and invit him to go swim or play basketbal . hi ripest hour were spent in the day-long basketbal game no one gave a damn about win . score wa never kept , and the number of player might vari from one to thirty-f . major major had never play basketbal or ani other game befor , but hi great , bob height and raptur enthusiasm help make up for hi innat clumsi and lack of experi . major major found true happi there on the lopsid basketbal court with the offic and enlist men who were almost hi friend . if there were no winner , there were no loser , and major major enjoy everi gambol moment right up till the day colonel cathcart roar up in hi jeep after major duluth wa kill and made it imposs for him ever to enjoy play basketbal there again . “ you ’ re the new squadron command , ” colonel cathcart had shout rude across the railroad ditch to him . “ but don ’ t think it mean anyth , becaus it doesn ’ t . all it mean is that you ’ re the new squadron commander. ” colonel cathcart had nurs an implac grudg against major major for a long time . a superflu major on hi roll meant an untidi tabl of organ and gave ammunit to the men at twenty-seventh air forc headquart who colonel cathcart wa posit were hi enemi and rival . colonel cathcart had been pray for just some stroke of good luck like major duluth ’ s death . he had been plagu by one extra major ; he now had an open for one major . he appoint major major squadron command and roar away in hi jeep as abruptli as he had come . for major major , it meant the end of the game . hi face flush with discomfort , and he wa root to the spot in disbelief as the rain cloud gather abov him again . when he turn to hi teammat , he encount a reef of curiou , reflect face all gaze at him woodenli with moros and inscrut animos . he shiver with shame . when the game resum , it wa not good ani longer . when he dribbl , no one tri to stop him ; when he call for a pass , whoever had the ball pass it ; and when he miss a basket , no one race him for the rebound . the onli voic wa hi own . the next day wa the same , and the day after that he did not come back . almost on cue , everyon in the squadron stop talk to him and start stare at him . he walk through life selfconsci with downcast eye and burn cheek , the object of contempt , envi , suspicion , resent and malici innuendo everywher he went . peopl who had hardli notic hi resembl to henri fonda befor now never ceas discuss it , and there were even those who hint sinisterli that major major had been elev to squadron command becaus he resembl henri fonda . captain black , who had aspir to the posit himself , maintain that major major realli wa henri fonda but wa too chickenshit to admit it . major major flounder bewilderedli from one embarrass catastroph to anoth . without consult him , sergeant towser had hi belong move into the roomi trailer major duluth had occupi alon , and when major major came rush breathlessli into the orderli room to report the theft of hi thing , the young corpor there scare him half out of hi wit by leap to hi feet and shout “ attent ! ” the moment he appear . major major snap to attent with all the rest in the orderli room , wonder what import personag had enter behind him . minut pass in rigid silenc , and the whole lot of them might have stood there at attent till doomsday if major danbi had not drop by from group to congratul major major twenti minut later and put them all at eas . major major fare even more lament at the mess hall , where milo , hi face flutteri with smile , wa wait to usher him proudli to a small tabl he had set up in front and decor with an embroid tablecloth and a nosegay of posi in a pink cut-glass vase . major major hung back with horror , but he wa not bold enough to resist with all the other watch . even havermey had lift hi head from hi plate to gape at him with hi heavi , pendul jaw . major major submit meekli to milo ’ s tug and cower in disgrac at hi privat tabl throughout the whole meal . the food wa ash in hi mouth , but he swallow everi mouth rather than risk offend ani of the men connect with it prepar . alon with milo later , major major felt protest stir for the first time and said he would prefer to continu eat with the other offic . milo told him it wouldn ’ t work . “ i don ’ t see what there is to work , ” major major argu . “ noth ever happen before. ” “ you were never the squadron command before. ” “ major duluth wa the squadron command and he alway ate at the same tabl with the rest of the men. ” “ it wa differ with major duluth , sir. ” “ in what way wa it differ with major duluth ? ” “ i wish you wouldn ’ t ask me that , sir , ” said milo . “ is it becaus i look like henri fonda ? ” major major muster the courag to demand . “ some peopl say you are henri fonda , ” milo answer . “ well , i ’ m not henri fonda , ” major major exclaim , in a voic quaver with exasper . “ and i don ’ t look the least bit like him . and even if i do look like henri fonda , what differ doe that make ? ” “ it doesn ’ t make ani differ . that ’ s what i ’ m tri to tell you , sir . it ’ s just not the same with you as it wa with major duluth. ” and it just wasn ’ t the same , for when major major , at the next meal , step from the food counter to sit with the other at the regular tabl , he wa frozen in hi track by the impenetr wall of antagon thrown up by their face and stood petrifi with hi tray quiver in hi hand until milo glide forward wordlessli to rescu him , by lead him tame to hi privat tabl . major major gave up after that and alway ate at hi tabl alon with hi back to the other . he wa certain they resent him becaus he seem too good to eat with them now that he wa squadron command . there wa never ani convers in the mess tent when major major wa present . he wa consciou that other offic tri to avoid eat at the same time , and everyon wa greatli reliev when he stop come there altogeth and began take hi meal in hi trailer . major major began forg washington irv ’ s name to offici document the day after the first c.i.d . man show up to interrog him about somebodi at the hospit who had been do it and gave him the idea . he had been bore and dissatisfi in hi new posit . he had been made squadron command but had no idea what he wa suppos to do as squadron command , unless all he wa suppos to do wa forg washington irv ’ s name to offici document and listen to the isol clink and thump of major -- de coverley ’ s horsesho fall to the ground outsid the window of hi small offic in the rear of the orderly-room tent . he wa hound incessantli by an impress of vital duti left unfulfil and wait in vain for hi respons to overtak him . he seldom went out unless it wa absolut necessari , for he could not get use to be stare at . occasion , the monotoni wa broken by some offic or enlist man sergeant towser refer to him on some matter that major major wa unabl to cope with and refer right back to sergeant towser for sensibl disposit . whatev he wa suppos to get done as squadron command appar wa get done without ani assist from him . he grew moodi and depress . at time he thought serious of go with all hi sorrow to see the chaplain , but the chaplain seem so overburden with miseri of hi own that major major shrank from ad to hi troubl . besid , he wa not quit sure if chaplain were for squadron command . he had never been quit sure about major -- de coverley , either , who , when he wa not away rent apart or kidnap foreign labor , had noth more press to do than pitch horsesho . major major often paid strict attent to the horsesho fall softli against the earth or ride down around the small steel peg in the ground . he peek out at major -- de coverley for hour and marvel that someon so august had noth more import to do . he wa often tempt to join major -- de coverley , but pitch horsesho all day long seem almost as dull as sign “ major major major ” to offici document , and major -- de coverley ’ s counten wa so forbid that major major wa in awe of approach him . major major wonder about hi relationship to major -- de coverley and about major -- de coverley ’ s relationship to him . he knew that major -- de coverley wa hi execut offic , but he did not know what that meant , and he could not decid whether in major -- de coverley he wa bless with a lenient superior or curs with a delinqu subordin . he did not want to ask sergeant towser , of whom he wa secretli afraid , and there wa no one els he could ask , least of all major -- de coverley . few peopl ever dare approach major -- de coverley about anyth and the onli offic foolish enough to pitch one of hi horsesho wa stricken the veri next day with the worst case of pianosan crud that gu or we or even doc daneeka had ever seen or even heard about . everyon wa posit the diseas had been inflict upon the poor offic in retribut by major -- de coverley , although no one wa sure how . most of the offici document that came to major major ’ s desk did not concern him at all . the vast major consist of allus to prior commun which major major had never seen or heard of . there wa never ani need to look them up , for the instruct were invari to disregard . in the space of a singl product minut , therefor , he might endors twenti separ document each advis him to pay absolut no attent to ani of the other . from gener peckem ’ s offic on the mainland came prolix bulletin each day head by such cheeri homili as “ procrastin is the thief of time ” and “ cleanli is next to godliness. ” gener peckem ’ s commun about cleanli and procrastin made major major feel like a filthi procrastin , and he alway got those out of the way as quickli as he could . the onli offici document that interest him were those occasion one pertain to the unfortun second lieuten who had been kill on the mission over orvieto less than two hour after he arriv on pianosa and whose partli unpack belong were still in yossarian ’ s tent . sinc the unfortun lieuten had report to the oper tent instead of to the orderli room , sergeant towser had decid that it would be safest to report him as never have report to the squadron at all , and the occasion document relat to him dealt with the fact that he seem to have vanish into thin air , which , in one way , wa exactli what did happen to him . in the long run , major major wa grate for the offici document that came to hi desk , for sit in hi offic sign them all day long wa a lot better than sit in hi offic all day long not sign them . they gave him someth to do . inevit , everi document he sign came back with a fresh page ad for a new signatur by him after interv of from two to ten day . they were alway much thicker than formerli , for in between the sheet bear hi last endors and the sheet ad for hi new endors were the sheet bear the most recent endors of all the other offic in scatter locat who were also occupi in sign their name to that same offici document . major major grew despond as he watch simpl commun swell prodigi into huge manuscript . no matter how mani time he sign one , it alway came back for still anoth signatur , and he began to despair of ever be free of ani of them . one day-it wa the day after the c.i.d . man ’ s first visit-major major sign washington irv ’ s name to one of the document instead of hi own , just to see how it would feel . he like it . he like it so much that for the rest of that afternoon he did the same with all the offici document . it wa an act of impuls frivol and rebellion for which he knew afterward he would be punish sever . the next morn he enter hi offic in trepid and wait to see what would happen . noth happen . he had sin , and it wa good , for none of the document to which he had sign washington irv ’ s name ever came back ! here , at last , wa progress , and major major threw himself into hi new career with uninhibit gusto . sign washington irv ’ s name to offici document wa not much of a career , perhap , but it wa less monoton than sign “ major major major. ” when washington irv did grow monoton , he could revers the order and sign irv washington until that grew monoton . and he wa get someth done , for none of the document sign with either of these name ever came back to the squadron . what did come back , eventu , wa a second c.i.d . man , masquerad as a pilot . the men knew he wa a c.i.d . man becaus he confid to them he wa and urg each of them not to reveal hi true ident to ani of the other men to whom he had alreadi confid that he wa a c.i.d . man . “ you ’ re the onli one in the squadron who know i ’ m a c.i.d . man , ” he confid to major major , “ and it ’ s absolut essenti that it remain a secret so that my effici won ’ t be impair . do you understand ? ” “ sergeant towser knows. ” “ ye , i know . i had to tell him in order to get in to see you . but i know he won ’ t tell a soul under ani circumstances. ” “ he told me , ” said major major . “ he told me there wa a c.i.d . man outsid to see me. ” “ that bastard . i ’ ll have to throw a secur check on him . i wouldn ’ t leav ani top-secret document lie around here if i were you . at least not until i make my report. ” “ i don ’ t get ani top-secret document , ” said major major . “ that ’ s the kind i mean . lock them in your cabinet where sergeant towser can ’ t get hi hand on them. ” “ sergeant towser ha the onli key to the cabinet. ” “ i ’ m afraid we ’ re wast time , ” said the second c.i.d . man rather stiffli . he wa a brisk , pudgi , high-strung person whose movement were swift and certain . he took a number of photostat out of a larg red expans envelop he had been hide conspicu beneath a leather flight jacket paint garishli with pictur of airplan fli through orang burst of flak and with orderli row of littl bomb signifi fifty-f combat mission flown . “ have you ever seen ani of these ? ” major major look with a blank express at copi of person correspond from the hospit on which the censor offic had written “ washington irv ” or “ irv washington. ” no . “ how about these ? ” major major gaze next at copi of offici document address to him to which he had been sign the same signatur . “ no. ” “ is the man who sign these name in your squadron ? ” “ which one ? there are two name here. ” “ either one . we figur that washington irv and irv washington are one man and that he ’ s use two name just to throw us off the track . that ’ s done veri often you know. ” “ i don ’ t think there ’ s a man with either of those name in my squadron. ” a look of disappoint cross the second c.i.d . man ’ s face . “ he ’ s a lot clever than we thought , ” he observ . “ he ’ s use a third name and pose as someon els . and i think… ye , i think i know what that third name is. ” with excit and inspir , he held anoth photostat out for major major to studi . “ how about thi ? ” major major bent forward slightli and saw a copi of the piec of v mail from which yossarian had black out everyth but the name mari and on which he had written , “ i yearn for you tragic . r. o. shipman , chaplain , u.s. army. ” major major shook hi head . “ i ’ ve never seen it before. ” “ do you know who r. o. shipman is ? ” “ he ’ s the group chaplain. ” “ that lock it up , ” said the second c.i.d . man . “ washington irv is the group chaplain. ” major major felt a twing of alarm . “ r . o. shipman is the group chaplain , ” he correct . “ are you sure ? ” “ yes. ” “ whi should the group chaplain write thi on a letter ? ” “ perhap somebodi els wrote it and forg hi name. ” “ whi should somebodi want to forg the group chaplain ’ s name ? ” “ to escap detection. ” “ you may be right , ” the second c.i.d . man decid after an instant ’ s hesit , and smack hi lip crispli . “ mayb we ’ re confront with a gang , with two men work togeth who just happen to have opposit name . ye , i ’ m sure that ’ s it . one of them here in the squadron , one of them up at the hospit and one of them with the chaplain . that make three men , doesn ’ t it ? are you absolut sure you never saw ani of these offici document befor ? ” “ i would have sign them if i had. ” “ with whose name ? ” ask the second c.i.d . man cunningli . “ your or washington irv ’ s ? ” “ with my own name , ” major major told him . “ i don ’ t even know washington irv ’ s name. ” the second c.i.d . man broke into a smile . “ major , i ’ m glad you ’ re in the clear . it mean we ’ ll be abl to work togeth , and i ’ m go to need everi man i can get . somewher in the european theater of oper is a man who ’ s get hi hand on commun address to you . have you ani idea who it can be ? ” “ no. ” “ well , i have a pretti good idea , ” said the second c.i.d . man , and lean forward to whisper confidenti . “ that bastard towser . whi els would he go around shoot hi mouth off about me ? now , you keep your eye open and let me know the minut you hear anyon even talk about washington irv . i ’ ll throw a secur check on the chaplain and everyon els around here. ” the moment he wa gone , the first c.i.d . man jump into major major ’ s offic through the window and want to know who the second c.i.d . man wa . major major bare recogn him . “ he wa a c.i.d . man , ” major major told him . “ like hell he wa , ” said the first c.i.d . man . “ i ’ m the c.i.d . man around here. ” major major bare recogn him becaus he wa wear a fade maroon corduroy bathrob with open seam under both arm , linti flannel pajama , and worn hous slipper with one flap sole . thi wa regul hospit dress , major major recal . the man had ad about twenti pound and seem burst with good health . “ i ’ m realli a veri sick man , ” he whine . “ i caught cold in the hospit from a fighter pilot and came down with a veri seriou case of pneumonia. ” “ i ’ m veri sorri , ” major major said . “ a lot of good that doe me , ” the c.i.d . man snivel . “ i don ’ t want your sympathi . i just want you to know what i ’ m go through . i came down to warn you that washington irv seem to have shift hi base of oper from the hospit to your squadron . you haven ’ t heard anyon around here talk about washington irv , have you ? ” “ as a matter of fact , i have , ” major major answer . “ that man who wa just in here . he wa talk about washington irving. ” “ wa he realli ? ” the first c.i.d . man cri with delight . “ thi might be just what we need to crack the case wide open ! you keep him under surveil twenty-four hour a day while i rush back to the hospit and write my superior for further instructions. ” the c.i.d . man jump out of major major ’ s offic through the window and wa gone . a minut later , the flap separ major major ’ s offic from the orderli room flew open and the second c.i.d . man wa back , puf frantic in hast . gasp for breath , he shout , “ i just saw a man in red pajama jump out of your window and go run up the road ! didn ’ t you see him ? ” “ he wa here talk to me , ” major major answer . “ i thought that look mighti suspici , a man jump out the window in red pajamas. ” the man pace about the small offic in vigor circl . “ at first i thought it wa you , hightail it for mexico . but now i see it wasn ’ t you . he didn ’ t say anyth about washington irv , did he ? ” “ as a matter of fact , ” said major major , “ he did. ” “ he did ? ” cri the second c.i.d . man . “ that ’ s fine ! thi might be just the break we need to crack the case wide open . do you know where we can find him ? ” “ at the hospit . he ’ s realli a veri sick man. ” “ that ’ s great ! ” exclaim the second c.i.d . man . “ i ’ ll go right up there after him . it would be best if i went incognito . i ’ ll go explain the situat at the medic tent and have them send me there as a patient. ” “ they won ’ t send me to the hospit as a patient unless i ’ m sick , ” he report back to major major . “ actual , i am pretti sick . i ’ ve been mean to turn myself in for a checkup , and thi will be a good opportun . i ’ ll go back to the medic tent and tell them i ’ m sick , and i ’ ll get sent to the hospit that way. ” “ look what they did to me , ” he report back to major major with purpl gum . hi distress wa inconsol . he carri hi shoe and sock in hi hand , and hi toe had been paint with gentian-violet solut , too . “ who ever heard of a c.i.d . man with purpl gum ? ” he moan . he walk away from the orderli room with hi head down and tumbl into a slit trench and broke hi nose . hi temperatur wa still normal , but gu and we made an except of him and sent him to the hospit in an ambul . major major had lie , and it wa good . he wa not realli surpris that it wa good , for he had observ that peopl who did lie were , on the whole , more resourc and ambiti and success than peopl who did not lie . had he told the truth to the second c.i.d . man , he would have found himself in troubl . instead he had lie and he wa free to continu hi work . he becam more circumspect in hi work as a result of the visit from the second c.i.d . man . he did all hi sign with hi left hand and onli while wear the dark glass and fals mustach he had use unsuccess to help him begin play basketbal again . as an addit precaut , he made a happi switch from washington irv to john milton . john milton wa suppl and concis . like washington irv , he could be revers with good effect whenev he grew monoton . furthermor , he enabl major major to doubl hi output , for john milton wa so much shorter than either hi own name or washington irv ’ s and took so much less time to write . john milton prove fruit in still one more respect . he wa versatil , and major major soon found himself incorpor the signatur in fragment of imaginari dialogu . thu , typic endors on the offici document might read , “ john milton is a sadist ” or “ have you seen milton , john ? ” one signatur of which he wa especi proud read , “ is anybodi in the john , milton ? ” john milton threw open whole new vista fill with charm , inexhaust possibl that promis to ward off monotoni forev . major major went back to washington irv when john milton grew monoton . major major had bought the dark glass and fals mustach in rome in a final , futil attempt to save himself from the swampi degrad into which he wa steadili sink . first there had been the aw humili of the great loyalti oath crusad , when not one of the thirti or forti peopl circul competit loyalti oath would even allow him to sign . then , just when that wa blow over , there wa the matter of cleving ’ s plane disappear so mysteri in thin air with everi member of the crew , and blame for the strang mishap center bale on him becaus he had never sign ani of the loyalti oath . the dark glass had larg magenta rim . the fals black mustach wa a flamboy organ-grind ’ s , and he wore them both to the basketbal game one day when he felt he could endur hi loneli no longer . he affect an air of jaunti familiar as he saunter to the court and pray silent that he would not be recogn . the other pretend not to recogn him , and he began to have fun . just as he finish congratul himself on hi innoc ruse he wa bump hard by one of hi oppon and knock to hi knee . soon he wa bump hard again , and it dawn on him that they did recogn him and that they were use hi disguis as a licens to elbow , trip and maul him . they did not want him at all . and just as he did realiz thi , the player on hi team fuse instinct with the player on the other team into a singl , howl , bloodthirsti mob that descend upon him from all side with foul curs and swing fist . they knock him to the ground , kick him while he wa on the ground , attack him again after he had struggl blindli to hi feet . he cover hi face with hi hand and could not see . they swarm all over each other in their frenzi compuls to bludgeon him , kick him , goug him , trampl him . he wa pummel spin to the edg of the ditch and sent slither down on hi head and shoulder . at the bottom he found hi foot , clamber up the other wall and stagger away beneath the hail of hoot and stone with which they pelt him until he lurch into shelter around a corner of the orderli room tent . hi paramount concern throughout the entir assault wa to keep hi dark glass and fals mustach in place so that he might continu pretend he wa somebodi els and be spare the dread necess of have to confront them with hi author . back in hi offic , he wept ; and when he finish weep he wash the blood from hi mouth and nose , scrub the dirt from the abras on hi cheek and forehead , and summon sergeant towser . “ from now on , ” he said , “ i don ’ t want anyon to come in to see me while i ’ m here . is that clear ? ” “ ye , sir , ” said sergeant towser . “ doe that includ me ? ” “ yes. ” “ i see . will that be all ? ” “ yes. ” “ what shall i say to the peopl who do come to see you while you ’ re here ? ” “ tell them i ’ m in and ask them to wait. ” “ ye , sir . for how long ? ” “ until i ’ ve left. ” “ and then what shall i do with them ? ” “ i don ’ t care. ” “ may i send them in to see you after you ’ ve left ? ” “ yes. ” “ but you won ’ t be here then , will you ? ” “ no. ” “ ye , sir . will that be all ? ” “ yes. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ from now on , ” major major said to the middle-ag enlist man who took care of hi trailer , “ i don ’ t want you to come here while i ’ m here to ask me if there ’ s anyth you can do for me . is that clear ? ” “ ye , sir , ” said the orderli . “ when should i come here to find out if there ’ s anyth you want me to do for you ? ” “ when i ’ m not here. ” “ ye , sir . and what should i do ? ” “ whatev i tell you to. ” “ but you won ’ t be here to tell me . will you ? ” “ no. ” “ then what should i do ? ” “ whatev ha to be done. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ that will be all , ” said major major . “ ye , sir , ” said the orderli . “ will that be all ? ” “ no , ” said major major . “ don ’ t come in to clean , either . don ’ t come in for anyth unless you ’ re sure i ’ m not here. ” “ ye , sir . but how can i alway be sure ? ” “ if you ’ re not sure , just assum that i am here and go away until you are sure . is that clear ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ i ’ m sorri to have to talk to you in thi way , but i have to . goodbye. ” “ goodby , sir. ” “ and thank you . for everything. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ from now on , ” major major said to milo minderbind , “ i ’ m not go to come to the mess hall ani more . i ’ ll have all my meal brought to me in my trailer. ” “ i think that ’ s a good idea , sir , ” milo answer . “ now i ’ ll be abl to serv you special dish that the other will never know about . i ’ m sure you ’ ll enjoy them . colonel cathcart alway does. ” “ i don ’ t want ani special dish . i want exactli what you serv all the other offic . just have whoever bring it knock onc on my door and leav the tray on the step . is that clear ? ” “ ye , sir , ” said milo . “ that ’ s veri clear . i ’ ve got some live main lobster hidden away that i can serv you tonight with an excel roquefort salad and two frozen éclair that were smuggl out of pari onli yesterday togeth with an import member of the french underground . will that do for a start ? ” “ no. ” “ ye , sir . i understand. ” for dinner that night milo serv him broil main lobster with excel roquefort salad and two frozen éclair . major major wa annoy . if he sent it back , though , it would onli go to wast or to somebodi els , and major major had a weak for broil lobster . he ate with a guilti conscienc . the next day for lunch there wa terrapin maryland with a whole quart of dom pérignon 1937 , and major major gulp it down without a thought . after milo , there remain onli the men in the orderli room , and major major avoid them by enter and leav everi time through the dingi celluloid window of hi offic . the window unbutton and wa low and larg and easi to jump through from either side . he manag the distanc between the orderli room and hi trailer by dart around the corner of the tent when the coast wa clear , leap down into the railroad ditch and dash along with head bow until he attain the sanctuari of the forest . abreast of hi trailer , he left the ditch and wove hi way speedili toward home through the dens underbrush , in which the onli person he ever encount wa captain flume , who , drawn and ghostli , frighten him half to death one twilight by materi without warn out of a patch of dewberri bush to complain that chief white halfoat had threaten to slit hi throat open from ear to ear . “ if you ever frighten me like that again , ” major major told him , “ i ’ ll slit your throat open from ear to ear. ” captain flume gasp and dissolv right back into the patch of dewberri bush , and major major never set eye on him again . when major major look back on what he had accomplish , he wa pleas . in the midst of a few foreign acr teem with more than two hundr peopl , he had succeed in becom a reclus . with a littl ingenu and vision , he had made it all but imposs for anyon in the squadron to talk to him , which wa just fine with everyon , he notic , sinc no one want to talk to him anyway . no one , it turn out , but that madman yossarian , who brought him down with a fli tackl one day as he wa scoot along the bottom of the ditch to hi trailer for lunch . the last person in the squadron major major want to be brought down with a fli tackl by wa yossarian . there wa someth inher disreput about yossarian , alway carri on so disgrac about that dead man in hi tent who wasn ’ t even there and then take off all hi cloth after the avignon mission and go around without them right up to the day gener dreedl step up to pin a medal on him for hi heroism over ferrara and found him stand in format stark nake . no one in the world had the power to remov the dead man ’ s disorgan effect from yossarian ’ s tent . major major had forfeit the author when he permit sergeant towser to report the lieuten who had been kill over orvieto less than two hour after he arriv in the squadron as never have arriv in the squadron at all . the onli one with ani right to remov hi belong from yossarian ’ s tent , it seem to major major , wa yossarian himself , and yossarian , it seem to major major , had no right . major major groan after yossarian brought him down with a fli tackl , and tri to wiggl to hi feet . yossarian wouldn ’ t let him . “ captain yossarian , ” yossarian said , “ request permiss to speak to the major at onc about a matter of life or death. ” “ let me up , pleas , ” major major bid him in cranki discomfort . “ i can ’ t return your salut while i ’ m lie on my arm. ” yossarian releas him . they stood up slowli . yossarian salut again and repeat hi request . “ let ’ s go to my offic , ” major major said . “ i don ’ t think thi is the best place to talk. ” “ ye , sir , ” answer yossarian . they smack the gravel from their cloth and walk in constrain silenc to the entranc of the orderli room . “ give me a minut or two to put some mercurochrom on these cut . then have sergeant towser send you in. ” “ ye , sir. ” major major strode with digniti to the rear of the orderli room without glanc at ani of the clerk and typist work at the desk and file cabinet . he let the flap lead to hi offic fall close behind him . as soon as he wa alon in hi offic , he race across the room to the window and jump outsid to dash away . he found yossarian block hi path . yossarian wa wait at attent and salut again . “ captain yossarian request permiss to speak to the major at onc about a matter of life or death , ” he repeat determinedli . “ permiss deni , ” major major snap . “ that won ’ t do it. ” major major gave in . “ all right , ” he conced wearili . “ i ’ ll talk to you . pleas jump insid my office. ” “ after you. ” they jump insid the offic . major major sat down , and yossarian move around in front of hi desk and told him that he did not want to fli ani more combat mission . what could he do ? major major ask himself . all he could do wa what he had been instruct to do by colonel korn and hope for the best . “ whi not ? ” he ask . “ i ’ m afraid. ” “ that ’ s noth to be asham of , ” major major counsel him kindli . “ we ’ re all afraid. ” “ i ’ m not asham , ” yossarian said . “ i ’ m just afraid. ” “ you wouldn ’ t be normal if you were never afraid . even the bravest men experi fear . one of the biggest job we all face in combat is to overcom our fear. ” “ oh , come on , major . can ’ t we do without that horseshit ? ” major major lower hi gaze sheepishli and fiddl with hi finger . “ what do you want me to tell you ? ” “ that i ’ ve flown enough mission and can go home. ” “ how mani have you flown ? ” “ fifty-one. ” “ you ’ ve onli got four more to fly. ” “ he ’ ll rais them . everi time i get close he rais them. ” “ perhap he won ’ t thi time. ” “ he never send anyon home , anyway . he just keep them around wait for rotat order until he doesn ’ t have enough men left for the crew , and then rais the number of mission and throw them all back on combat statu . he ’ s been do that ever sinc he got here. ” “ you mustn ’ t blame colonel cathcart for ani delay with the order , ” major major advis . “ it ’ s twenty-seventh air forc ’ s respons to process the order promptli onc they get them from us. ” “ he could still ask for replac and send us home when the order did come back . anyway , i ’ ve been told that twenty-seventh air forc want onli forti mission and that it ’ s onli hi own idea to get us to fli fifty-five. ” “ i wouldn ’ t know anyth about that , ” major major answer . “ colonel cathcart is our command offic and we must obey him . whi don ’ t you fli the four more mission and see what happen ? ” “ i don ’ t want to. ” what could you do ? major major ask himself again . what could you do with a man who look you squar in the eye and said he would rather die than be kill in combat , a man who wa at least as matur and intellig as you were and who you had to pretend wa not ? what could you say to him ? “ suppos we let you pick your mission and fli milk run , ” major major said . “ that way you can fli the four mission and not run ani risks. ” “ i don ’ t want to fli milk run . i don ’ t want to be in the war ani more. ” “ would you like to see our countri lose ? ” major major ask . “ we won ’ t lose . we ’ ve got more men , more money and more materi . there are ten million men in uniform who could replac me . some peopl are get kill and a lot more are make money and have fun . let somebodi els get killed. ” “ but suppos everybodi on our side felt that way. ” “ then i ’ d certainli be a damn fool to feel ani other way . wouldn ’ t i ? ” what could you possibl say to him ? major major wonder forlornli . one thing he could not say wa that there wa noth he could do . to say there wa noth he could do would suggest he would do someth if he could and impli the exist of an error of injustic in colonel korn ’ s polici . colonel korn had been most explicit about that . he must never say there wa noth he could do . “ i ’ m sorri , ” he said . “ but there ’ s noth i can do. ” 10 wintergreen cleving wa dead . that wa the basic flaw in hi philosophi . eighteen plane had let down through a beam white cloud off the coast of elba one afternoon on the way back from the weekli milk run to parma ; seventeen came out . no trace wa ever found of the other , not in the air or on the smooth surfac of the jade water below . there wa no debri . helicopt circl the white cloud till sunset . dure the night the cloud blew away , and in the morn there wa no more cleving . the disappear wa astound , as astound , certainli , as the grand conspiraci of loweri field , when all sixty-four men in a singl barrack vanish one payday and were never heard of again . until cleving wa snatch from exist so adroitli , yossarian had assum that the men had simpli decid unanim to go awol the same day . in fact , he had been so encourag by what appear to be a mass desert from sacr respons that he had gone run outsid in elat to carri the excit news to ex-p.f.c . wintergreen . “ what ’ s so excit about it ? ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen sneer obnoxi , rest hi filthi gi shoe on hi spade and loung back in a surli slouch against the wall of one of the deep , squar hole it wa hi militari specialti to dig . ex-p.f.c . wintergreen wa a snide littl punk who enjoy work at cross-purpos . each time he went awol , he wa caught and sentenc to dig and fill up hole six feet deep , wide and long for a specifi length of time . each time he finish hi sentenc , he went awol again . ex-p.f.c . wintergreen accept hi role of dig and fill up hole with all the uncomplain dedic of a true patriot . “ it ’ s not a bad life , ” he would observ philosoph . “ and i guess somebodi ha to do it. ” he had wisdom enough to understand that dig hole in colorado wa not such a bad assign in wartim . sinc the hole were in no great demand , he could dig them and fill them up at a leisur pace , and he wa seldom overwork . on the other hand , he wa bust down to buck privat each time he wa court-marti . he regret thi loss of rank keenli . “ it wa kind of nice be a p.f.c. , ” he reminisc yearningli . “ i had status-y know what i mean ? – and i use to travel in the best circles. ” hi face darken with resign . “ but that ’ s all behind me now , ” he guess . “ the next time i go over the hill it will be as a buck privat , and i just know it won ’ t be the same. ” there wa no futur in dig hole . “ the job isn ’ t even steadi . i lose it each time i finish serv my sentenc . then i have to go over the hill again if i want it back . and i can ’ t even keep do that . there ’ s a catch . catch-22 . the next time i go over the hill , it will mean the stockad . i don ’ t know what ’ s go to becom of me . i might even wind up oversea if i ’ m not careful. ” he did not want to keep dig hole for the rest of hi life , although he had no object to do it as long as there wa a war go on and it wa part of the war effort . “ it ’ s a matter of duti , ” he observ , “ and we each have our own to perform . my duti is to keep dig these hole , and i ’ ve been do such a good job of it that i ’ ve just been recommend for the good conduct medal . your duti is to screw around in cadet school and hope the war end befor you get out . the duti of the men in combat is to win the war , and i just wish they were do their duti as well as i ’ ve been do mine . it wouldn ’ t be fair if i had to go oversea and do their job too , would it ? ” one day ex-p.f.c . wintergreen struck open a water pipe while dig in one of hi hole and almost drown to death befor he wa fish out nearli unconsci . word spread that it wa oil , and chief white halfoat wa kick off the base . soon everi man who could find a shovel wa outsid dig frenziedli for oil . dirt flew everywher ; the scene wa almost like the morn in pianosa seven month later after the night milo bomb the squadron with everi plane he had accumul in hi m amp ; m syndic , and the airfield , bomb dump and repair hangar as well , and all the survivor were outsid hack cavern shelter into the solid ground and roof them over with sheet of armor plate stolen from the repair shed at the field and with tatter squar of waterproof canva stolen from the side flap of each other ’ s tent . chief white halfoat wa transfer out of colorado at the first rumor of oil and came to rest final in pianosa as a replac for lieuten coomb , who had gone out on a mission as a guest one day just to see what combat wa like and had die over ferrara in the plane with kraft . yossarian felt guilti each time he rememb kraft , guilti becaus kraft had been kill on yossarian ’ s second bomb run , and guilti becaus kraft had got mix up innoc also in the splendid atabrin insurrect that had begun in puerto rico on the first leg of their flight oversea and end in pianosa ten day later with applebi stride duti into the orderli room the moment he arriv to report yossarian for refus to take hi atabrin tablet . the sergeant there invit him to be seat . “ thank you , sergeant , i think i will , ” said applebi . “ about how long will i have to wait ? i ’ ve still got a lot to get done today so that i can be fulli prepar bright and earli tomorrow morn to go into combat the minut they want me to. ” “ sir ? ” “ what ’ s that , sergeant ? ” “ what wa your question ? ” “ about how long will i have to wait befor i can go in to see the major ? ” “ just until he goe out to lunch , ” sergeant towser repli . “ then you can go right in. ” “ but he won ’ t be there then . will he ? ” “ no , sir . major major won ’ t be back in hi offic until after lunch. ” “ i see , ” applebi decid uncertainli . “ i think i ’ d better come back after lunch , then. ” applebi turn from the orderli room in secret confus . the moment he step outsid , he thought he saw a tall , dark offic who look a littl like henri fonda come jump out of the window of the orderly-room tent and go scoot out of sight around the corner . applebi halt and squeez hi eye close . an anxiou doubt assail him . he wonder if he were suffer from malaria , or , wors , from an overdos of atabrin tablet . applebi had been take four time as mani atabrin tablet as the amount prescrib becaus he want to be four time as good a pilot as everyon els . hi eye were still shut when sergeant towser tap him lightli on the shoulder and told him he could go in now if he want to , sinc major major had just gone out . applebi ’ s confid return . “ thank you , sergeant . will he be back soon ? ” “ he ’ ll be back right after lunch . then you ’ ll have to go right out and wait for him in front till he leav for dinner . major major never see anyon in hi offic while he ’ s in hi office. ” “ sergeant , what did you just say ? ” “ i said that major major never see anyon in hi offic while he ’ s in hi office. ” applebi stare at sergeant towser intent and attempt a firm tone . “ sergeant , are you tri to make a fool out of me just becaus i ’ m new in the squadron and you ’ ve been oversea a long time ? ” “ oh , no , sir , ” answer the sergeant deferenti . “ those are my order . you can ask major major when you see him. ” “ that ’ s just what i intend to do , sergeant . when can i see him ? ” “ never. ” crimson with humili , applebi wrote down hi report about yossarian and the atabrin tablet on a pad the sergeant offer him and left quickli , wonder if perhap yossarian were not the onli man privileg to wear an offic ’ s uniform who wa crazi . by the time colonel cathcart had rais the number of mission to fifty-f , sergeant towser had begun to suspect that perhap everi man who wore a uniform wa crazi . sergeant towser wa lean and angular and had fine blond hair so light it wa almost without color , sunken cheek , and teeth like larg white marshmallow . he ran the squadron and wa not happi do it . men like hungri joe glower at him with blame hatr , and applebi subject him to vindict discourtesi now that he had establish himself as a hot pilot and a ping-pong player who never lost a point . sergeant towser ran the squadron becaus there wa no one els in the squadron to run it . he had no interest in war or advanc . he wa interest in shard and hepplewhit furnitur . almost without realiz it , sergeant towser had fallen into the habit of think of the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent in yossarian ’ s own terms-a a dead man in yossarian ’ s tent . in realiti , he wa no such thing . he wa simpli a replac pilot who had been kill in combat befor he had offici report for duti . he had stop at the oper tent to inquir the way to the orderly-room tent and had been sent right into action becaus so mani men had complet the thirty-f mission requir then that captain piltchard and captain wren were find it difficult to assembl the number of crew specifi by group . becaus he had never offici gotten into the squadron , he could never offici be gotten out , and sergeant towser sens that the multipli commun relat to the poor man would continu reverber forev . hi name wa mudd . to sergeant towser , who deplor violenc and wast with equal avers , it seem like such an abhorr extravag to fli mudd all the way across the ocean just to have him blown into bit over orvieto less than two hour after he arriv . no one could recal who he wa or what he had look like , least of all captain piltchard and captain wren , who rememb onli that a new offic had shown up at the oper tent just in time to be kill and who color uneasili everi time the matter of the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent wa mention . the onli one who might have seen mudd , the men in the same plane , had all been blown to bit with him . yossarian , on the other hand , knew exactli who mudd wa . mudd wa the unknown soldier who had never had a chanc , for that wa the onli thing anyon ever did know about all the unknown soldiers-they never had a chanc . they had to be dead . and thi dead one wa realli unknown , even though hi belong still lay in a tumbl on the cot in yossarian ’ s tent almost exactli as he had left them three month earlier the day he never arrived-al contamin with death less than two hour later , in the same way that all wa contamin with death in the veri next week dure the great big sieg of bologna when the moldi odor of mortal hung wet in the air with the sulphur fog and everi man schedul to fli wa alreadi taint . there wa no escap the mission to bologna onc colonel cathcart had volunt hi group for the ammunit dump there that the heavi bomber on the italian mainland had been unabl to destroy from their higher altitud . each day ’ s delay deepen the awar and deepen the gloom . the cling , overpow convict of death spread steadili with the continu rainfal , soak mordantli into each man ’ s ail counten like the corros blot of some crawl diseas . everyon smell of formaldehyd . there wa nowher to turn for help , not even to the medic tent , which had been order close by colonel korn so that no one could report for sick call , as the men had done on the one clear day with a mysteri epidem of diarrhea that had forc still anoth postpon . with sick call suspend and the door to the medic tent nail shut , doc daneeka spent the interv between rain perch on a high stool , wordlessli absorb the bleak outbreak of fear with a sorrow neutral , roost like a melancholi buzzard below the omin , hand-lett sign tack up on the close door of the medic tent by captain black as a joke and left hang there by doc daneeka becaus it wa no joke . the sign wa border in dark crayon and read : “ close until further notic . death in the family. ” the fear flow everywher , into dunbar ’ s squadron , where dunbar poke hi head inquiringli through the entranc of the medic tent there one twilight and spoke respect to the blur outlin of dr. stubb , who wa sit in the dens shadow insid befor a bottl of whiskey and a bell jar fill with purifi drink water . “ are you all right ? ” he ask solicit . “ terribl , ” dr. stubb answer . “ what are you do here ? ” “ sitting. ” “ i thought there wa no more sick call. ” “ there ain ’ t. ” “ then whi are you sit here ? ” “ where els should i sit ? at the goddam offic ’ club with colonel cathcart and korn ? do you know what i ’ m do here ? ” “ sitting. ” “ in the squadron , i mean . not in the tent . don ’ t be such a goddam wise guy . can you figur out what a doctor is do here in the squadron ? ” “ they ’ ve got the door to the medic tent nail shut in the other squadron , ” dunbar remark . “ if anyon sick walk through my door i ’ m go to ground him , ” dr. stubb vow . “ i don ’ t give a damn what they say. ” “ you can ’ t ground anyon , ” dunbar remind . “ don ’ t you know the order ? ” “ i ’ ll knock him flat on hi ass with an inject and realli ground him. ” dr. stubb laugh with sardon amus at the prospect . “ they think they can order sick call out of exist . the bastard . ooop , there it goe again. ” the rain began fall again , first in the tree , then in the mud puddl , then , faintli , like a sooth murmur , on the tent top . “ everyth ’ s wet , ” dr. stubb observ with revuls . “ even the latrin and urin are back up in protest . the whole goddam world smell like a charnel house. ” the silenc seem bottomless when he stop talk . night fell . there wa a sens of vast isol . “ turn on the light , ” dunbar suggest . “ there is no light . i don ’ t feel like start my gener . i use to get a big kick out of save peopl ’ s live . now i wonder what the hell ’ s the point , sinc they all have to die anyway . “ oh , there ’ s a point , all right , ” dunbar assur him . “ is there ? what is the point ? ” “ the point is to keep them from die for as long as you can. ” “ yeah , but what ’ s the point , sinc they all have to die anyway ? ” “ the trick is not to think about that. ” “ never mind the trick . what the hell ’ s the point ? ” dunbar ponder in silenc for a few moment . “ who the hell know ? ” dunbar didn ’ t know . bologna should have exult dunbar , becaus the minut dawdl and the hour drag like centuri . instead it tortur him , becaus he knew he wa go to be kill . “ do you realli want some more codein ? ” dr. stubb ask . “ it ’ s for my friend yossarian . he ’ s sure he ’ s go to be killed. ” “ yossarian ? who the hell is yossarian ? what the hell kind of a name is yossarian , anyway ? isn ’ t he the one who got drunk and start that fight with colonel korn at the offic ’ club the other night ? ” “ that ’ s right . he ’ s assyrian. ” “ that crazi bastard. ” “ he ’ s not so crazi , ” dunbar said . “ he swear he ’ s not go to fli to bologna. ” “ that ’ s just what i mean , ” dr. stubb answer . “ that crazi bastard may be the onli sane one left. ” 11 captain black corpor kolodni learn about it first in a phone call from group and wa so shaken by the news that he cross the intellig tent on tipto to captain black , who wa rest drowsili with hi blade shin up on the desk , and relay the inform to him in a shock whisper . captain black brighten immedi . “ bologna ? ” he exclaim with delight . “ well , i ’ ll be damned. ” he broke into loud laughter . “ bologna , huh ? ” he laugh again and shook hi head in pleasant amaz . “ oh , boy ! i can ’ t wait to see those bastard ’ face when they find out they ’ re go to bologna . ha , ha , ha ! ” it wa the first realli good laugh captain black had enjoy sinc the day major major outsmart him and wa appoint squadron command , and he rose with torpid enthusiasm and station himself behind the front counter in order to wring the most enjoy from the occas when the bombardi arriv for their map kit . “ that ’ s right , you bastard , bologna , ” he kept repeat to all the bombardi who inquir incredul if they were realli go to bologna . “ ha ! ha ! ha ! eat your liver , you bastard . thi time you ’ re realli in for it. ” captain black follow the last of them outsid to observ with relish the effect of the knowledg upon all of the other offic and enlist men who were assembl with their helmet , parachut and flak suit around the four truck idl in the center of the squadron area . he wa a tall , narrow , disconsol man who move with a crabbi listless . he shave hi pinch , pale face everi third or fourth day , and most of the time he appear to be grow a reddish-gold mustach over hi skinni upper lip . he wa not disappoint in the scene outsid . there wa constern darken everi express , and captain black yawn delici , rub the last lethargi from hi eye and laugh gloatingli each time he told someon els to eat hi liver . bologna turn out to be the most reward event in captain black ’ s life sinc the day major duluth wa kill over perugia and he wa almost select to replac him . when word of major duluth ’ s death wa radio back to the field , captain black respond with a surg of joy . although he had never realli contempl the possibl befor , captain black understood at onc that he wa the logic man to succeed major duluth as squadron command . to begin with , he wa the squadron intellig offic , which meant he wa more intellig than everyon els in the squadron . true , he wa not on combat statu , as major duluth had been and as all squadron command customarili were ; but thi wa realli anoth power argument in hi favor , sinc hi life wa in no danger and he would be abl to fill the post for as long as hi countri need him . the more captain black thought about it , the more inevit it seem . it wa mere a matter of drop the right word in the right place quickli . he hurri back to hi offic to determin a cours of action . settl back in hi swivel chair , hi feet up on the desk and hi eye close , he began imagin how beauti everyth would be onc he wa squadron command . while captain black wa imagin , colonel cathcart wa act , and captain black wa flabbergast by the speed with which , he conclud , major major had outsmart him . hi great dismay at the announc of major major ’ s appoint as squadron command wa ting with an embitt resent he made no effort to conceal . when fellow administr offic express astonish at colonel cathcart ’ s choic of major major , captain black mutter that there wa someth funni go on ; when they specul on the polit valu of major major ’ s resembl to henri fonda , captain black assert that major major realli wa henri fonda ; and when they remark that major major wa somewhat odd , captain black announc that he wa a communist . “ they ’ re take over everyth , ” he declar rebelli . “ well , you fellow can stand around and let them if you want to , but i ’ m not go to . i ’ m go to do someth about it . from now on i ’ m go to make everi son of a bitch who come to my intellig tent sign a loyalti oath . and i ’ m not go to let that bastard major major sign one even if he want to. ” almost overnight the gloriou loyalti oath crusad wa in full flower , and captain black wa enraptur to discov himself spearhead it . he had realli hit on someth . all the enlist men and offic on combat duti had to sign a loyalti oath to get their map case from the intellig tent , a second loyalti oath to receiv their flak suit and parachut from the parachut tent , a third loyalti oath for lieuten balkington , the motor vehicl offic , to be allow to ride from the squadron to the airfield in one of the truck . everi time they turn around there wa anoth loyalti oath to be sign . they sign a loyalti oath to get their pay from the financ offic , to obtain their px suppli , to have their hair cut by the italian barber . to captain black , everi offic who support hi gloriou loyalti oath crusad wa a competitor , and he plan and plot twenty-four hour a day to keep one step ahead . he would stand second to none in hi devot to countri . when other offic had follow hi urg and introduc loyalti oath of their own , he went them one better by make everi son of a bitch who came to hi intellig tent sign two loyalti oath , then three , then four ; then he introduc the pledg of allegi , and after that “ the star-spangl banner , ” one choru , two chorus , three chorus , four chorus . each time captain black forg ahead of hi competitor , he swung upon them scorn for their failur to follow hi exampl . each time they follow hi exampl , he retreat with concern and rack hi brain for some new stratagem that would enabl him to turn upon them scorn again . without realiz how it had come about , the combat men in the squadron discov themselv domin by the administr appoint to serv them . they were bulli , insult , harass and shove about all day long by one after the other . when they voic object , captain black repli that peopl who were loyal would not mind sign all the loyalti oath they had to . to anyon who question the effect of the loyalti oath , he repli that peopl who realli did owe allegi to their countri would be proud to pledg it as often as he forc them to . and to anyon who question the moral , he repli that “ the star-spangl banner ” wa the greatest piec of music ever compos . the more loyalti oath a person sign , the more loyal he wa ; to captain black it wa as simpl as that , and he had corpor kolodni sign hundr with hi name each day so that he could alway prove he wa more loyal than anyon els . “ the import thing is to keep them pledg , ” he explain to hi cohort . “ it doesn ’ t matter whether they mean it or not . that ’ s whi they make littl kid pledg allegi even befor they know what ‘ pledg ’ and ‘ allegi ’ mean. ” to captain piltchard and captain wren , the gloriou loyalti oath crusad wa a gloriou pain in the ass , sinc it complic their task of organ the crew for each combat mission . men were tie up all over the squadron sign , pledg and sing , and the mission took hour longer to get under way . effect emerg action becam imposs , but captain piltchard and captain wren were both too timid to rais ani outcri against captain black , who scrupul enforc each day the doctrin of “ continu reaffirm ” that he had origin , a doctrin design to trap all those men who had becom disloy sinc the last time they had sign a loyalti oath the day befor . it wa captain black who came with advic to captain piltchard and captain wren as they pitch about in their bewild predica . he came with a deleg and advis them bluntli to make each man sign a loyalti oath befor allow him to fli on a combat mission . “ of cours , it ’ s up to you , ” captain black point out . “ nobodi ’ s tri to pressur you . but everyon els is make them sign loyalti oath , and it ’ s go to look mighti funni to the f.b.i . if you two are the onli one who don ’ t care enough about your countri to make them sign loyalti oath , too . if you want to get a bad reput , that ’ s nobodi ’ s busi but your own . all we ’ re tri to do is help. ” milo wa not convinc and absolut refus to depriv major major of food , even if major major wa a communist , which milo secretli doubt . milo wa by natur oppos to ani innov that threaten to disrupt the normal cours of affair . milo took a firm moral stand and absolut refus to particip in the gloriou loyalti oath crusad until captain black call upon him with hi deleg and request him to . “ nation defens is everybodi ’ s job , ” captain black repli to milo ’ s object . “ and thi whole program is voluntari , milo-don ’ t forget that . the men don ’ t have to sign piltchard and wren ’ s loyalti oath if they don ’ t want to . but we need you to starv them to death if they don ’ t . it ’ s just like catch-22 . don ’ t you get it ? you ’ re not against catch-22 , are you ? ” doc daneeka wa adam . “ what make you so sure major major is a communist ? ” “ you never heard him deni it until we began accus him , did you ? and you don ’ t see him sign ani of our loyalti oaths. ” “ you aren ’ t let him sign any. ” “ of cours not , ” captain black explain . “ that would defeat the whole purpos of our crusad . look , you don ’ t have to play ball with us if you don ’ t want to . but what ’ s the point of the rest of us work so hard if you ’ re go to give major major medic attent the minut milo begin starv him to death ? i just wonder what they ’ re go to think up at group about the man who ’ s undermin our whole secur program . they ’ ll probabl transfer you to the pacific. ” doc daneeka surrend swiftli . “ i ’ ll go tell gu and we to do whatev you want them to. ” up at group , colonel cathcart had alreadi begun wonder what wa go on . “ it ’ s that idiot black off on a patriot bing , ” colonel korn report with a smile . “ i think you ’ d better play ball with him for a while , sinc you ’ re the one who promot major major to squadron commander. ” “ that wa your idea , ” colonel cathcart accus him petulantli . “ i never should have let you talk me into it. ” “ and a veri good idea it wa , too , ” retort colonel korn , “ sinc it elimin that superflu major that ’ s been give you such an aw black eye as an administr . don ’ t worri , thi will probabl run it cours soon . the best thing to do now is send captain black a letter of total support and hope he drop dead befor he doe too much damage. ” colonel korn wa struck with a whimsic thought . “ i wonder ! you don ’ t suppos that imbecil will tri to turn major major out of hi trailer , do you ? ” “ the next thing we ’ ve got to do is turn that bastard major major out of hi trailer , ” captain black decid . “ i ’ d like to turn hi wife and kid out into the wood , too . but we can ’ t . he ha no wife and kid . so we ’ ll just have to make do with what we have and turn him out . who ’ s in charg of the tent ? ” “ he is. ” “ you see ? ” cri captain black . “ they ’ re take over everyth ! well , i ’ m not go to stand for it . i ’ ll take thi matter right to major -- de coverley himself if i have to . i ’ ll have milo speak to him about it the minut he get back from rome. ” captain black had boundless faith in the wisdom , power and justic of major -- de coverley , even though he had never spoken to him befor and still found himself without the courag to do so . he deput milo to speak to major -- de coverley for him and storm about impati as he wait for the tall execut offic to return . along with everyon els in the squadron , he live in profound awe and rever of the majest , white-hair major with craggi face and jehovean bear , who came back from rome final with an injur eye insid a new celluloid eye patch and smash hi whole gloriou crusad to bit with a singl stroke . milo care said noth when major -- de coverley step into the mess hall with hi fierc and auster digniti the day he return and found hi way block by a wall of offic wait in line to sign loyalti oath . at the far end of the food counter , a group of men who had arriv earlier were pledg allegi to the flag , with tray of food balanc in one hand , in order to be allow to take seat at the tabl . alreadi at the tabl , a group that had arriv still earlier wa sing “ the star-spangl banner ” in order that they might use the salt and pepper and ketchup there . the hubbub began to subsid slowli as major -- de coverley paus in the doorway with a frown of puzzl disapprov , as though view someth bizarr . he start forward in a straight line , and the wall of offic befor him part like the red sea . glanc neither left nor right , he strode indomit up to the steam counter and , in a clear , full-bodi voic that wa gruff with age and reson with ancient emin and author , said : “ gim me eat. ” instead of eat , corpor snark gave major -- de coverley a loyalti oath to sign . major -- de coverley swept it away with mighti displeasur the moment he recogn what it wa , hi good eye flare up blindingli with fieri disdain and hi enorm old corrug face darken in mountain wrath . “ gim me eat , i said , ” he order loudli in harsh tone that rumbl omin through the silent tent like clap of distant thunder . corpor snark turn pale and began to trembl . he glanc toward milo pleadingli for guidanc . for sever terribl second there wa not a sound . then milo nod . “ give him eat , ” he said . corpor snark began give major -- de coverley eat . major -- de coverley turn from the counter with hi tray full and came to a stop . hi eye fell on the group of other offic gaze at him in mute appeal , and , with righteou belliger , he roar : “ give everybodi eat ! ” “ give everybodi eat ! ” milo echo with joy relief , and the gloriou loyalti oath crusad came to an end . captain black wa deepli disillus by thi treacher stab in the back from someon in high place upon whom he had reli so confid for support . major -- de coverley had let him down . “ oh , it doesn ’ t bother me a bit , ” he respond cheer to everyon who came to him with sympathi . “ we complet our task . our purpos wa to make everyon we don ’ t like afraid and to alert peopl to the danger of major major , and we certainli succeed at that . sinc we weren ’ t go to let him sign loyalti oath anyway , it doesn ’ t realli matter whether we have them or not. ” see everyon in the squadron he didn ’ t like afraid onc again throughout the appal , intermin great big sieg of bologna remind captain black nostalg of the good old day of hi gloriou loyalti oath crusad when he had been a man of real consequ , and when even big shot like milo minderbind , doc daneeka and piltchard and wren had trembl at hi approach and grovel at hi feet . to prove to newcom that he realli had been a man of consequ onc , he still had the letter of commend he had receiv from colonel cathcart . 12 bologna actual , it wa not captain black but sergeant knight who trigger the solemn panic of bologna , slip silent off the truck for two extra flak suit as soon as he learn the target and signal the start of the grim process back into the parachut tent that degener into a frantic stamped final befor all the extra flak suit were gone . “ hey , what ’ s go on ? ” kid sampson ask nervous . “ bologna can ’ t be that rough , can it ? ” nate , sit trancelik on the floor of the truck , held hi grave young face in both hand and did not answer him . it wa sergeant knight and the cruel seri of postpon , for just as they were climb up into their plane that first morn , along came a jeep with the news that it wa rain in bologna and that the mission would be delay . it wa rain in pianosa too by the time they return to the squadron , and they had the rest of that day to stare woodenli at the bomb line on the map under the awn of the intellig tent and rumin hypnot on the fact that there wa no escap . the evid wa there vividli in the narrow red ribbon tack across the mainland : the ground forc in itali were pin down forty-two insurmount mile south of the target and could not possibl captur the citi in time . noth could save the men in pianosa from the mission to bologna . they were trap . their onli hope wa that it would never stop rain , and they had no hope becaus they all knew it would . when it did stop rain in pianosa , it rain in bologna . when it stop rain in bologna , it began again in pianosa . if there wa no rain at all , there were freakish , inexplic phenomena like the epidem of diarrhea or the bomb line that move . four time dure the first six day they were assembl and brief and then sent back . onc , they took off and were fli in format when the control tower summon them down . the more it rain , the wors they suffer . the wors they suffer , the more they pray that it would continu rain . all through the night , men look at the sky and were sadden by the star . all through the day , they look at the bomb line on the big , wobbl easel map of itali that blew over in the wind and wa drag in under the awn of the intellig tent everi time the rain began . the bomb line wa a scarlet band of narrow satin ribbon that delin the forwardmost posit of the alli ground forc in everi sector of the italian mainland . the morn after hungri joe ’ s fist fight with hupl ’ s cat , the rain stop fall in both place . the land strip began to dri . it would take a full twenty-four hour to harden ; but the sky remain cloudless . the resent incub in each man hatch into hatr . first they hate the infantrymen on the mainland becaus they had fail to captur bologna . then they began to hate the bomb line itself . for hour they stare relentlessli at the scarlet ribbon on the map and hate it becaus it would not move up high enough to encompass the citi . when night fell , they congreg in the dark with flashlight , continu their macabr vigil at the bomb line in brood entreati as though hope to move the ribbon up by the collect weight of their sullen prayer . “ i realli can ’ t believ it , ” cleving exclaim to yossarian in a voic rise and fall in protest and wonder . “ it ’ s a complet revers to primit superstit . they ’ re confus caus and effect . it make as much sens as knock on wood or cross your finger . they realli believ that we wouldn ’ t have to fli that mission tomorrow if someon would onli tipto up to the map in the middl of the night and move the bomb line over bologna . can you imagin ? you and i must be the onli ration one left. ” in the middl of the night yossarian knock on wood , cross hi finger , and tipto out of hi tent to move the bomb line up over bologna . corpor kolodni tipto stealthili into captain black ’ s tent earli the next morn , reach insid the mosquito net and gentli shook the moist shoulder-blad he found there until captain black open hi eye . “ what are you wake me up for ? ” whimper captain black . “ they captur bologna , sir , ” said corpor kolodni . “ i thought you ’ d want to know . is the mission cancel ? ” captain black tug himself erect and began scratch hi scrawni long thigh method . in a littl while he dress and emerg from hi tent , squint , cross and unshaven . the sky wa clear and warm . he peer without emot at the map . sure enough , they had captur bologna . insid the intellig tent , corpor kolodni wa alreadi remov the map of bologna from the navig kit . captain black seat himself with a loud yawn , lift hi feet to the top of hi desk and phone colonel korn . “ what are you wake me up for ? ” whimper colonel korn . “ they captur bologna dure the night , sir . is the mission cancel ? ” “ what are you talk about , black ? ” colonel korn growl . “ whi should the mission be cancel ? ” “ becaus they captur bologna , sir . isn ’ t the mission cancel ? ” “ of cours the mission is cancel . do you think we ’ re bomb our own troop now ? ” “ what are you wake me up for ? ” colonel cathcart whimper to colonel korn . “ they captur bologna , ” colonel korn told him . “ i thought you ’ d want to know. ” “ who captur bologna ? ” “ we did. ” colonel cathcart wa overjoy , for he wa reliev of the embarrass commit to bomb bologna without blemish to the reput for valor he had earn by volunt hi men to do it . gener dreedl wa pleas with the captur of bologna , too , although he wa angri with colonel moodu for wake him up to tell him about it . headquart wa also pleas and decid to award a medal to the offic who captur the citi . there wa no offic who had captur the citi , so they gave the medal to gener peckem instead , becaus gener peckem wa the onli offic with suffici initi to ask for it . as soon as gener peckem had receiv hi medal , he began ask for increas respons . it wa gener peckem ’ s opinion that all combat unit in the theater should be place under the jurisdict of the special servic corp , of which gener peckem himself wa the command offic . if drop bomb on the enemi wa not a special servic , he reflect aloud frequent with the martyr smile of sweet reason that wa hi loyal confeder in everi disput , then he could not help wonder what in the world wa . with amiabl regret , he declin the offer of a combat post under gener dreedl . “ fli combat mission for gener dreedl is not exactli what i had in mind , ” he explain indulg with a smooth laugh . “ i wa think more in term of replac gener dreedl , or perhap of someth abov gener dreedl where i could exercis supervis over a great mani other gener too . you see , my most preciou abil are mainli administr one . i have a happi facil for get differ peopl to agree. ” “ he ha a happi facil for get differ peopl to agre what a prick he is , ” colonel cargil confid invidi to ex-p.f.c . wintergreen in the hope that ex-p.f.c . wintergreen would spread the unfavor report along through twenty-seventh air forc headquart . “ if anyon deserv that combat post , i do . it wa even my idea that we ask for the medal. ” “ you realli want to go into combat ? ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen inquir . “ combat ? ” colonel cargil wa aghast . “ oh , no-you misunderstand me . of cours , i wouldn ’ t actual mind go into combat , but my best abil are mainli administr one . i too have a happi facil for get differ peopl to agree. ” “ he too ha a happi facil for get differ peopl to agre what a prick he is , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen confid with a laugh to yossarian , after he had come to pianosa to learn if it wa realli true about milo and the egyptian cotton . “ if anyon deserv a promot , i do. ” actual , he had risen alreadi to ex-corpor , have shot through the rank shortli after hi transfer to twenty-seventh air forc headquart as a mail clerk and been bust right down to privat for make odiou audibl comparison about the commiss offic for whom he work . the headi tast of success had infus him further with moral and fire him with ambit for loftier attain . “ do you want to buy some zippo lighter ? ” he ask yossarian . “ they were stolen right from quartermaster. ” “ doe milo know you ’ re sell cigarett lighter ? ” “ what ’ s it hi busi ? milo ’ s not carri cigarett lighter too now , is he ? ” “ he sure is , ” yossarian told him . “ and hi aren ’ t stolen. ” “ that ’ s what you think , ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen answer with a lacon snort . “ i ’ m sell mine for a buck apiec . what ’ s he get for hi ? ” “ a dollar and a penny. ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen snicker triumphantli . “ i beat him everi time , ” he gloat . “ say , what about all that egyptian cotton he ’ s stuck with ? how much did he buy ? ” “ all. ” “ in the whole world ? well , i ’ ll be damn ! ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen crow with malici glee . “ what a dope ! you were in cairo with him . whi ’ d you let him do it ? ” “ me ? ” yossarian answer with a shrug . “ i have no influenc on him . it wa those teletyp machin they have in all the good restaur there . milo had never seen a stock ticker befor , and the quotat for egyptian cotton happen to be come in just as he ask the headwait to explain it to him . ‘ egyptian cotton ? ’ milo said with that look of hi . ‘ how much is egyptian cotton sell for ? ’ the next thing i knew he had bought the whole goddam harvest . and now he can ’ t unload ani of it. ” “ he ha no imagin . i can unload plenti of it in the black market if he ’ ll make a deal. ” “ milo know the black market . there ’ s no demand for cotton. ” “ but there is a demand for medic suppli . i can roll the cotton up on wooden toothpick and peddl them as steril swab . will he sell to me at a good price ? ” “ he won ’ t sell to you at ani price , ” yossarian answer . “ he ’ s pretti sore at you for go into competit with him . in fact , he ’ s pretti sore at everybodi for get diarrhea last weekend and give hi mess hall a bad name . say , you can help us. ” yossarian suddenli seiz hi arm . “ couldn ’ t you forg some offici order on that mimeograph machin of your and get us out of fli to bologna ? ” ex-p.f.c . wintergreen pull away slowli with a look of scorn . “ sure i could , ” he explain with pride . “ but i would never dream of do anyth like that. ” “ whi not ? ” “ becaus it ’ s your job . we all have our job to do . my job is to unload these zippo lighter at a profit if i can and pick up some cotton from milo . your job is to bomb the ammunit dump at bologna. ” “ but i ’ m go to be kill at bologna , ” yossarian plead . “ we ’ re all go to be killed. ” “ then you ’ ll just have to be kill , ” repli ex-p.f.c . wintergreen . “ whi can ’ t you be a fatalist about it the way i am ? if i ’ m destin to unload these lighter at a profit and pick up some egyptian cotton cheap from milo , then that ’ s what i ’ m go to do . and if you ’ re destin to be kill over bologna , then you ’ re go to be kill , so you might just as well go out and die like a man . i hate to say thi , yossarian , but you ’ re turn into a chronic complainer. ” cleving agre with ex-p.f.c . wintergreen that it wa yossarian ’ s job to get kill over bologna and wa livid with condemn when yossarian confess that it wa he who had move the bomb line and caus the mission to be cancel . “ whi the hell not ? ” yossarian snarl , argu all the more vehement becaus he suspect he wa wrong . “ am i suppos to get my ass shot off just becaus the colonel want to be a gener ? ” “ what about the men on the mainland ? ” cleving demand with just as much emot . “ are they suppos to get their ass shot off just becaus you don ’ t want to go ? those men are entitl to air support ! ” “ but not necessarili by me . look , they don ’ t care who knock out those ammunit dump . the onli reason we ’ re go is becaus that bastard cathcart volunt us. ” “ oh , i know all that , ” cleving assur him , hi gaunt face pale and hi agit brown eye swim in sincer . “ but the fact remain that those ammunit dump are still stand . you know veri well that i don ’ t approv of colonel cathcart ani more than you do. ” cleving paus for emphasi , hi mouth quiver , and then beat hi fist down softli against hi sleeping-bag . “ but it ’ s not for us to determin what target must be destroy or who ’ s to destroy them or- “ “ or who get kill do it ? and whi ? ” “ ye , even that . we have no right to question- “ “ you ’ re insan ! ” “ -no right to question- “ “ do you realli mean that it ’ s not my busi how or whi i get kill and that it is colonel cathcart ’ s ? do you realli mean that ? ” “ ye , i do , ” cleving insist , seem unsur . “ there are men entrust with win the war who are in a much better posit than we are to decid what target have to be bombed. ” “ we are talk about two differ thing , ” yossarian answer with exagger weari . “ you are talk about the relationship of the air corp to the infantri , and i am talk about the relationship of me to colonel cathcart . you are talk about win the war , and i am talk about win the war and keep alive. ” “ exactli , ” cleving snap smugli . “ and which do you think is more import ? ” “ to whom ? ” yossarian shot back . “ open your eye , cleving . it doesn ’ t make a damn bit of differ who win the war to someon who ’ s dead. ” cleving sat for a moment as though he ’ d been slap . “ congratul ! ” he exclaim bitterli , the thinnest milk-whit line enclos hi lip tightli in a bloodless , squeez ring . “ i can ’ t think of anoth attitud that could be depend upon to give greater comfort to the enemy. ” “ the enemi , ” retort yossarian with weight precis , “ is anybodi who ’ s go to get you kill , no matter which side he ’ s on , and that includ colonel cathcart . and don ’ t you forget that , becaus the longer you rememb it , the longer you might live. ” but cleving did forget it , and now he wa dead . at the time , cleving wa so upset by the incid that yossarian did not dare tell him he had also been respons for the epidem of diarrhea that had caus the other unnecessari postpon . milo wa even more upset by the possibl that someon had poison hi squadron again , and he came bustl fret to yossarian for assist . “ pleas find out from corpor snark if he put laundri soap in the sweet potato again , ” he request furtiv . “ corpor snark trust you and will tell you the truth if you give him your word you won ’ t tell anyon els . as soon as he tell you , come and tell me. ” “ of cours i put laundri soap in the sweet potato , ” corpor snark admit to yossarian . “ that ’ s what you ask me to do , isn ’ t it ? laundri soap is the best way. ” “ he swear to god he didn ’ t have a thing to do with it , ” yossarian report back to milo . milo pout dubious . “ dunbar say there is no god. ” there wa no hope left . by the middl of the second week , everyon in the squadron began to look like hungri joe , who wa not schedul to fli and scream horribl in hi sleep . he wa the onli one who could sleep . all night long , men move through the dark outsid their tent like tongueless wraith with cigarett . in the daytim they stare at the bomb line in futil , droop cluster or at the still figur of doc daneeka sit in front of the close door of the medic tent beneath the morbid hand-lett sign . they began to invent humorless , glum joke of their own and disastr rumor about the destruct await them at bologna . yossarian sidl up drunkenli to colonel korn at the offic ’ club one night to kid with him about the new lepag gun that the german had move in . “ what lepag gun ? ” colonel korn inquir with curios . “ the new three-hundred-and-forty-four-millimet lepag glue gun , ” yossarian answer . “ it glue a whole format of plane togeth in mid-air. ” colonel korn jerk hi elbow free from yossarian ’ s clutch finger in startl affront . “ let go of me , you idiot ! ” he cri out furious , glare with vindict approv as nate leap upon yossarian ’ s back and pull him away . “ who is that lunat , anyway ? ” colonel cathcart chortl merrili . “ that ’ s the man you made me give a medal to after ferrara . you had me promot him to captain , too , rememb ? it serv you right. ” nate wa lighter than yossarian and had great difficulti maneuv yossarian ’ s lurch bulk across the room to an unoccupi tabl . “ are you crazi ? ” nate kept hiss with trepid . “ that wa colonel korn . are you crazi ? ” yossarian want anoth drink and promis to leav quietli if nate brought him one . then he made nate bring him two more . when nate final coax him to the door , captain black came stomp in from outsid , bang hi slosh shoe down hard on the wood floor and spill water from hi eav like a high roof . “ boy , are you bastard in for it ! ” he announc exuberantli , splash away from the puddl form at hi feet . “ i just got a call from colonel korn . do you know what they ’ ve got wait for you at bologna ? ha ! ha ! they ’ ve got the new lepag glue gun . it glue a whole format of plane togeth in mid-air. ” “ my god , it ’ s true ! ” yossarian shriek , and collaps against nate in terror . “ there is no god , ” answer dunbar calmli , come up with a slight stagger . “ hey , give me a hand with him , will you ? i ’ ve got to get him back in hi tent. ” “ say who ? ” “ say me . gee , look at the rain. ” “ we ’ ve got to get a car. ” “ steal captain black ’ s car , ” said yossarian . “ that ’ s what i alway do. ” “ we can ’ t steal anybodi ’ s car . sinc you began steal the nearest car everi time you want one , nobodi leav the ignit on. ” “ hop in , ” said chief white halfoat , drive up drunk in a cover jeep . he wait until they had crowd insid and then spurt ahead with a sudden that roll them all over backward . he roar with laughter at their curs . he drove straight ahead when he left the park lot and ram the car into the embank on the other side of the road . the other pile forward in a helpless heap and began curs him again . “ i forgot to turn , ” he explain . “ be care , will you ? ” nate caution . “ you ’ d better put your headlight on. ” chief white halfoat pull back in revers , made hi turn and shot away up the road at top speed . the wheel were sibil on the whizz blacktop surfac . “ not so fast , ” urg nate . “ you ’ d better take me to your squadron first so i can help you put him to bed . then you can drive me back to my squadron. ” “ who the hell are you ? ” “ dunbar. ” “ hey , put your headlight on , ” nate shout . “ and watch the road ! ” “ they are on . isn ’ t yossarian in thi car ? that ’ s the onli reason i let the rest of you bastard in. ” chief white halfoat turn complet around to stare into the back seat . “ watch the road ! ” “ yossarian ? is yossarian in here ? ” “ i ’ m here , chief . let ’ s go home . what make you so sure ? you never answer my question. ” “ you see ? i told you he wa here. ” “ what question ? ” “ whatev it wa we were talk about. ” “ wa it import ? ” “ i don ’ t rememb if it wa import or not . i wish to god i knew what it was. ” “ there is no god. ” “ that ’ s what we were talk about , ” yossarian cri . “ what make you so sure ? ” “ hey , are you sure your headlight are on ? ” nate call out . “ they ’ re on , they ’ re on . what doe he want from me ? it ’ s all thi rain on the windshield that make it look dark from back there. ” “ beauti , beauti rain. ” “ i hope it never stop rain . rain , rain , go a- “ “ -way . come a- “ “ -again some oth- “ “ -er day . littl yo-yo wants- “ “ -to play . in- “ “ -the meadow , in- “ chief white halfoat miss the next turn in the road and ran the jeep all the way up to the crest of a steep embank . roll back down , the jeep turn over on it side and settl softli in the mud . there wa a frighten silenc . “ is everyon all right ? ” chief white halfoat inquir in a hush voic . no one wa injur , and he heav a long sigh of relief . “ you know , that ’ s my troubl , ” he groan . “ i never listen to anybodi . somebodi kept tell me to put my headlight on , but i just wouldn ’ t listen. ” “ i kept tell you to put your headlight on. ” “ i know , i know . and i just wouldn ’ t listen , would i ? i wish i had a drink . i do have a drink . look . it ’ s not broken. ” “ it ’ s rain in , ” nate notic . “ i ’ m get wet. ” chief white halfoat got the bottl of rye open , drank and hand it off . ly tangl up on top of each other , they all drank but nate , who kept grope ineffectu for the door handl . the bottl fell against hi head with a clunk , and whiskey pour down hi neck . he began writh convuls . “ hey , we ’ ve got to get out of here ! ” he cri . “ we ’ ll all drown. ” “ is anybodi in there ? ” ask cleving with concern , shine a flashlight down from the top . “ it ’ s cleving ! ” they shout , and tri to pull him in through the window as he reach down to aid them . “ look at them ! ” cleving exclaim indignantli to mcwatt , who sat grin at the wheel of the staff car . “ ly there like a bunch of drunken anim . you too , nate ? you ought to be asham ! come on-help me get them out of here befor they all die of pneumonia. ” “ you know , that don ’ t sound like such a bad idea , ” chief white halfoat reflect . “ i think i will die of pneumonia. ” “ whi ? ” “ whi not ? ” answer chief white halfoat , and lay back in the mud contentedli with the bottl of rye cuddl in hi arm . “ oh , now look what he ’ s do ! ” cleving exclaim with irrit . “ will you get up and get into the car so we can all go back to the squadron ? ” “ we can ’ t all go back . someon ha to stay here to help the chief with thi car he sign out of the motor pool. ” chief white halfoat settl back in the staff car with an ebulli , pride chuckl . “ that ’ s captain black ’ s car , ” he inform them jubilantli . “ i stole it from him at the offic ’ club just now with an extra set of key he thought he lost thi morning. ” “ well , i ’ ll be damn ! that call for a drink. ” “ haven ’ t you had enough to drink ? ” cleving began scold as soon as mcwatt start the car . “ look at you . you don ’ t care if you drink yourselv to death or drown yourselv to death , do you ? ” “ just as long as we don ’ t fli ourselv to death. ” “ hey , open it up , open it up , ” chief white halfoat urg mcwatt . “ and turn off the headlight . that ’ s the onli way to do it. ” “ doc daneeka is right , ” cleving went on . “ peopl don ’ t know enough to take care of themselv . i realli am disgust with all of you. ” “ okay , fatmouth , out of the car , ” chief white halfoat order . “ everybodi get out of the car but yossarian . where ’ s yossarian ? ” “ get the hell off me. ” yossarian laugh , push him away . “ you ’ re all cover with mud. ” cleving focus on nate . “ you ’ re the one who realli surpris me . do you know what you smell like ? instead of tri to keep him out of troubl , you get just as drunk as he is . suppos he got in anoth fight with applebi ? ” cleving ’ s eye open wide with alarm when he heard yossarian chuckl . “ he didn ’ t get in anoth fight with applebi , did he ? ” “ not thi time , ” said dunbar . “ no , not thi time . thi time i did even better. ” “ thi time he got in a fight with colonel korn. ” “ he didn ’ t ! ” gasp cleving . “ he did ? ” exclaim chief white halfoat with delight . “ that call for a drink. ” “ but that ’ s terribl ! ” cleving declar with deep apprehens . “ whi in the world did you have to pick on colonel korn ? say , what happen to the light ? whi is everyth so dark ? ” “ i turn them off , ” answer mcwatt . “ you know , chief white halfoat is right . it ’ s much better with the headlight off. ” “ are you crazi ? ” cleving scream , and lung forward to snap the headlight on . he whirl around upon yossarian in near hysteria . “ you see what you ’ re do ? you ’ ve got them all act like you ! suppos it stop rain and we have to fli to bologna tomorrow . you ’ ll be in fine physic condition. ” “ it won ’ t ever gon na stop rain . no , sir , a rain like thi realli might go on forever. ” “ it ha stop rain ! ” someon said , and the whole car fell silent . “ you poor bastard , ” chief white halfoat murmur compassion after a few moment had pass . “ did it realli stop rain ? ” yossarian ask meekli . mcwatt switch off the windshield wiper to make certain . the rain had stop . the sky wa start to clear . the moon wa sharp behind a gauzi brown mist . “ oh , well , ” sang mcwatt soberli . “ what the hell. ” “ don ’ t worri , fella , ” chief white halfoat said . “ the land strip is too soft to use tomorrow . mayb it ’ ll start rain again befor the field dri out. ” “ you goddam stink lousi son of a bitch , ” hungri joe scream from hi tent as they sped into the squadron . “ jesu , is he back here tonight ? i thought he wa still in rome with the courier ship. ” “ oh ! ooooh ! oooooooh ! ” hungri joe scream . chief white halfoat shudder . “ that guy give me the willi , ” he confess in a grouchi whisper . “ hey , whatev happen to captain flume ? ” “ there ’ s a guy that give me the willi . i saw him in the wood last week eat wild berri . he never sleep in hi trailer ani more . he look like hell. ” “ hungri joe ’ s afraid he ’ ll have to replac somebodi who goe on sick call , even though there is no sick call . did you see him the other night when he tri to kill havermey and fell into yossarian ’ s slit trench ? ” “ ooooh ! ” scream hungri joe . “ oh ! ooooh ! ooooooh ! ” “ it sure is a pleasur not have flume around in the mess hall ani more . no more of that ‘ pass the salt , walt. ’ ” “ or ‘ pass the bread , fred. ’ ” “ or ‘ shoot me a beet , pete. ’ ” “ keep away , keep away , ” hungri joe scream . “ i said keep away , keep away , you goddam stink lousi son of a bitch. ” “ at least we found out what he dream about , ” dunbar observ wryli . “ he dream about goddam stink lousi son of bitches. ” late that night hungri joe dream that hupl ’ s cat wa sleep on hi face , suffoc him , and when he woke up , hupl ’ s cat wa sleep on hi face . hi agoni wa terrifi , the pierc , unearthli howl with which he split the moonlit dark vibrat in it own impact for second afterward like a devast shock . a numb silenc follow , and then a riotou din rose from insid hi tent . yossarian wa among the first one there . when he burst through the entranc , hungri joe had hi gun out and wa struggl to wrench hi arm free from hupl to shoot the cat , who kept spit and feint at him feroci to distract him from shoot hupl . both human were in their gi underwear . the unfrost light bulb overhead wa swing crazili on it loos wire , and the jumbl black shadow kept swirl and bob chaotic , so that the entir tent seem to be reel . yossarian reach out instinct for balanc and then launch himself forward in a prodigi dive that crush the three combat to the ground beneath him . he emerg from the mele with the scruff of a neck in each hand-hungri joe ’ s neck and the cat ’ s . hungri joe and the cat glare at each other savag . the cat spat vicious at hungri joe , and hungri joe tri to hit it with a haymak . “ a fair fight , ” yossarian decre , and all the other who had come run to the uproar in horror began cheer ecstat in a tremend overflow of relief . “ we ’ ll have a fair fight , ” he explain offici to hungri joe and the cat after he had carri them both outsid , still hold them apart by the scruff of their neck . “ fist , fang and claw . but no gun , ” he warn hungri joe . “ and no spit , ” he warn the cat sternli . “ when i turn you both loos , go . break clean in the clinch and come back fight . go ! ” there wa a huge , giddi crowd of men who were avid for ani divers , but the cat turn chicken the moment yossarian releas him and fled from hungri joe ignomini like a yellow dog . hungri joe wa declar the winner . he swagger away happili with the proud smile of a champion , hi shrivel head high and hi emaci chest out . he went back to bed victori and dream again that hupl ’ s cat wa sleep on hi face , suffoc him . 13 major -- de coverley move the bomb line did not fool the german , but it did fool major -- de coverley , who pack hi musett bag , command an airplan and , under the impress that florenc too had been captur by the alli , had himself flown to that citi to rent two apart for the offic and the enlist men in the squadron to use on rest leav . he had still not return by the time yossarian jump back outsid major major ’ s offic and wonder whom to appeal to next for help . major -- de coverley wa a splendid , awe-inspir , grave old man with a massiv leonin head and an angri shock of wild white hair that rage like a blizzard around hi stern , patriarch face . hi duti as squadron execut offic did consist entir , as both doc daneeka and major major had conjectur , of pitch horsesho , kidnap italian labor , and rent apart for the enlist men and offic to use on rest leav , and he excel at all three . each time the fall of a citi like napl , rome or florenc seem immin , major -- de coverley would pack hi musett bag , command an airplan and a pilot , and have himself flown away , accomplish all thi without utter a word , by the sheer forc of hi solemn , domin visag and the peremptori gestur of hi wrinkl finger . a day or two after the citi fell , he would be back with leas on two larg and luxuri apart there , one for the offic and one for the enlist men , both alreadi staf with compet , jolli cook and maid . a few day after that , newspap would appear throughout the world with photograph of the first american soldier bludgeon their way into the shatter citi through rubbl and smoke . inevit , major -- de coverley wa among them , seat straight as a ramrod in a jeep he had obtain from somewher , glanc neither right nor left as the artilleri fire burst about hi invinc head and lith young infantrymen with carbin went lope up along the sidewalk in the shelter of burn build or fell dead in doorway . he seem etern indestruct as he sat there surround by danger , hi featur mold firmli into that same fierc , regal , just and forbid counten which wa recogn and rever by everi man in the squadron . to german intellig , major -- de coverley wa a vexati enigma ; not one of the hundr of american prison would ever suppli ani concret inform about the elderli white-hair offic with the gnarl and menac brow and blaze , power eye who seem to spearhead everi import advanc so fearlessli and success . to american author hi ident wa equal perplex ; a whole regiment of crack c.i.d . men had been thrown into the front line to find out who he wa , while a battalion of combat-harden public-rel offic stood on red alert twenty-four hour a day with order to begin public him the moment he wa locat . in rome , major -- de coverley had outdon himself with the apart . for the offic , who arriv in group of four or five , there wa an immens doubl room for each in a new white stone build , with three spaciou bathroom with wall of shimmer aquamarin tile and one skinni maid name michaela who titter at everyth and kept the apart in spotless order . on the land below live the obsequi owner . on the land abov live the beauti rich black-hair countess and her beauti , rich black-hair daughter-in-law , both of whom would put out onli for nate , who wa too shi to want them , and for aarfi , who wa too stuffi to take them and tri to dissuad them from ever put out for anyon but their husband , who had chosen to remain in the north with the famili ’ s busi interest . “ they ’ re realli a coupl of good kid , ” aarfi confid earnestli to yossarian , whose recur dream it wa to have the nude milk-whit femal bodi of both these beauti rich black-hair good kid lie stretch out in bed erot with him at the same time . the enlist men descend upon rome in gang of twelv or more with gargantuan appetit and heavi crate fill with can food for the women to cook and serv to them in the dine room of their own apart on the sixth floor of a red brick build with a clink elev . there wa alway more activ at the enlist men ’ s place . there were alway more enlist men , to begin with , and more women to cook and serv and sweep and scrub , and then there were alway the gay and silli sensual young girl that yossarian had found and brought there and those that the sleepi enlist men return to pianosa after their exhaust seven-day debauch had brought there on their own and were leav behind for whoever want them next . the girl had shelter and food for as long as they want to stay . all they had to do in return wa hump ani of the men who ask them to , which seem to make everyth just about perfect for them . everi fourth day or so hungri joe came crash in like a man in torment , hoars , wild , and frenet , if he had been unlucki enough to finish hi mission again and wa fli the courier ship . most time he slept at the enlist men ’ s apart . nobodi wa certain how mani room major -- de coverley had rent , not even the stout black-bod woman in corset on the first floor from whom he had rent them . they cover the whole top floor , and yossarian knew they extend down to the fifth floor as well , for it wa in snowden ’ s room on the fifth floor that he had final found the maid in the lime-color panti with a dust mop the day after bologna , after hungri joe had discov him in bed with luciana at the offic ’ apart that same morn and had gone run like a fiend for hi camera . the maid in the lime-color panti wa a cheer , fat , oblig woman in her mid-thirti with squashi thigh and sway ham in lime-color panti that she wa alway roll off for ani man who want her . she had a plain broad face and wa the most virtuou woman aliv : she laid for everybodi , regardless of race , creed , color or place of nation origin , donat herself sociabl as an act of hospit , procrastin not even for the moment it might take to discard the cloth or broom or dust mop she wa clutch at the time she wa grab . her allur stem from her access ; like mt . everest , she wa there , and the men climb on top of her each time they felt the urg . yossarian wa in love with the maid in the lime-color panti becaus she seem to be the onli woman left he could make love to without fall in love with . even the bald-head girl in sicili still evok in him strong sensat of piti , tender and regret . despit the multipl peril to which major -- de coverley expos himself each time he rent apart , hi onli injuri had occur , iron enough , while he wa lead the triumphal process into the open citi of rome , where he wa wound in the eye by a flower fire at him from close rang by a seedi , cackl , intox old man , who , like satan himself , had then bound up on major -- de coverley ’ s car with malici glee , seiz him roughli and contemptu by hi vener white head and kiss him mockingli on each cheek with a mouth reek with sour fume of wine , chees and garlic , befor drop back into the joyou celebr throng with a hollow , dri , excori laugh . major -- de coverley , a spartan in advers , did not flinch onc throughout the whole hideou ordeal . and not until he had return to pianosa , hi busi in rome complet , did he seek medic attent for hi wound . he resolv to remain binocular and specifi to doc daneeka that hi eye patch be transpar so that he could continu pitch horsesho , kidnap italian labor and rent apart with unimpair vision . to the men in the squadron , major -- de coverley wa a colossu , although they never dare tell him so . the onli one who ever did dare address him wa milo minderbind , who approach the horseshoe-pitch pit with a hard-boil egg hi second week in the squadron and held it aloft for major -- de coverley to see . major -- de coverley straighten with astonish at milo ’ s effronteri and concentr upon him the full furi of hi storm counten with it rug overhang of gulli forehead and huge crag of a humpback nose that came charg out of hi face wrath like a big ten fullback . milo stood hi ground , take shelter behind the hard-boil egg rais protect befor hi face like a magic charm . in time the gale began to subsid , and the danger pass . “ what is that ? ” major -- de coverley demand at last . “ an egg , ” milo answer “ what kind of an egg ? ” major -- de coverley demand . “ a hard-boil egg , ” milo answer . “ what kind of a hard-boil egg ? ” major -- de coverley demand . “ a fresh hard-boil egg , ” milo answer . “ where did the fresh egg come from ? ” major -- de coverley demand . “ from a chicken , ” milo answer . “ where is the chicken ? ” major -- de coverley demand . “ the chicken is in malta , ” milo answer . “ how mani chicken are there in malta ? ” “ enough chicken to lay fresh egg for everi offic in the squadron at five cent apiec from the mess fund , ” milo answer . “ i have a weak for fresh egg , ” major -- de coverley confess . “ if someon put a plane at my dispos , i could fli down there onc a week in a squadron plane and bring back all the fresh egg we need , ” milo answer . “ after all , malta ’ s not so far away. ” “ malta ’ s not so far away , ” major -- de coverley observ . “ you could probabl fli down there onc a week in a squadron plane and bring back all the fresh egg we need. ” “ ye , ” milo agre . “ i suppos i could do that , if someon want me to and put a plane at my disposal. ” “ i like my fresh egg fri , ” major -- de coverley rememb . “ in fresh butter. ” “ i can find all the fresh butter we need in sicili for twenty-f cent a pound , ” milo answer . “ twenty-f cent a pound for fresh butter is a good buy . there ’ s enough money in the mess fund for butter too , and we could probabl sell some to the other squadron at a profit and get back most of what we pay for our own. ” “ what ’ s your name , son ? ” ask major -- de coverley . “ my name is milo minderbind , sir . i am twenty-seven year old. ” “ you ’ re a good mess offic , milo. ” “ i ’ m not the mess offic , sir. ” “ you ’ re a good mess offic , milo. ” “ thank you , sir . i ’ ll do everyth in my power to be a good mess officer. ” “ bless you , my boy . have a horseshoe. ” “ thank you , sir . what should i do with it ? ” “ throw it. ” “ away ? ” “ at the peg there . then pick it up and throw it at thi peg . it ’ s a game , see ? you get the horsesho back. ” “ ye , sir . i see . how much are horsesho sell for ? ” the smell of a fresh egg snap exot in a pool of fresh butter carri a long way on the mediterranean trade wind and brought gener dreedl race back with a voraci appetit , accompani by hi nurs , who accompani him everywher , and hi son-in-law , colonel moodu . in the begin gener dreedl devour all hi meal in milo ’ s mess hall . then the other three squadron in colonel cathcart ’ s group turn their mess hall over to milo and gave him an airplan and a pilot each so that he could buy fresh egg and fresh butter for them too . milo ’ s plane shuttl back and forth seven day a week as everi offic in the four squadron began devour fresh egg in an insati orgi of fresh-egg eat . gener dreedl devour fresh egg for breakfast , lunch and dinner-between meal he devour more fresh eggs-until milo locat abund sourc of fresh veal , beef , duck , babi lamb chop , mushroom cap , broccoli , south african rock lobster tail , shrimp , ham , pud , grape , ice cream , strawberri and artichok . there were three other bomb group in gener dreedl ’ s combat wing , and they each jealous dispatch their own plane to malta for fresh egg , but discov that fresh egg were sell there for seven cent apiec . sinc they could buy them from milo for five cent apiec , it made more sens to turn over their mess hall to hi syndic , too , and give him the plane and pilot need to ferri in all the other good food he promis to suppli as well . everyon wa elat with thi turn of event , most of all colonel cathcart , who wa convinc he had won a feather in hi cap . he greet milo jovial each time they met and , in an excess of contrit generos , impuls recommend major major for promot . the recommend wa reject at onc at twenty-seventh air forc headquart by ex-p.f.c . wintergreen , who scribbl a brusqu , unsign remind that the armi had onli one major major major major and did not intend to lose him by promot just to pleas colonel cathcart . colonel cathcart wa stung by the blunt rebuk and skulk guiltili about hi room in smart repudi . he blame major major for thi black eye and decid to bust him down to lieuten that veri same day . “ they probabl won ’ t let you , ” colonel korn remark with a condescend smile , savor the situat . “ for precis the same reason that they wouldn ’ t let you promot him . besid , you ’ d certainli look foolish tri to bust him down to lieuten right after you tri to promot him to my rank. ” colonel cathcart felt hem in on everi side . he had been much more success in obtain a medal for yossarian after the debacl of ferrara , when the bridg span the po wa still stand undamag seven day after colonel cathcart had volunt to destroy it . nine mission hi men had flown there in six day , and the bridg wa not demolish until the tenth mission on the seventh day , when yossarian kill kraft and hi crew by take hi flight of six plane in over the target a second time . yossarian came in care on hi second bomb run becaus he wa brave then . he buri hi head in hi bombsight until hi bomb were away ; when he look up , everyth insid the ship wa suffus in a weird orang glow . at first he thought that hi own plane wa on fire . then he spi the plane with the burn engin directli abov him and scream to mcwatt through the intercom to turn left hard . a second later , the wing of kraft ’ s plane blew off . the flame wreck drop , first the fuselag , then the spin wing , while a shower of tini metal fragment began tap danc on the roof of yossarian ’ s own plane and the incess cachung ! cachung ! cachung ! of the flak wa still thump all around him . back on the ground , everi eye watch grimli as he walk in dull deject up to captain black outsid the green clapboard brief room to make hi intellig report and learn that colonel cathcart and colonel korn were wait to speak to him insid . major danbi stood bar the door , wave everyon els away in ashen silenc . yossarian wa leaden with fatigu and long to remov hi sticki cloth . he step into the brief room with mix emot , uncertain how he wa suppos to feel about kraft and the other , for they had all die in the distanc of a mute and seclud agoni at a moment when he wa up to hi own ass in the same vile , excruci dilemma of duti and damnat . colonel cathcart , on the other hand , wa all broken up by the event . “ twice ? ” he ask . “ i would have miss it the first time , ” yossarian repli softli , hi face lower . their voic echo slightli in the long , narrow bungalow . “ but twice ? ” colonel cathcart repeat , in vivid disbelief . “ i would have miss it the first time , ” yossarian repeat . “ but kraft would be alive. ” “ and the bridg would still be up. ” “ a train bombardi is suppos to drop hi bomb the first time , ” colonel cathcart remind him . “ the other five bombardi drop their bomb the first time. ” “ and miss the target , ” yossarian said . “ we ’ d have had to go back there again. ” “ and mayb you would have gotten it the first time then. ” “ and mayb i wouldn ’ t have gotten it at all. ” “ but mayb there wouldn ’ t have been ani losses. ” “ and mayb there would have been more loss , with the bridg still left stand . i thought you want the bridg destroyed. ” “ don ’ t contradict me , ” colonel cathcart said . “ we ’ re all in enough trouble. ” “ i ’ m not contradict you , sir. ” “ ye you are . even that ’ s a contradiction. ” “ ye , sir . i ’ m sorry. ” colonel cathcart crack hi knuckl violent . colonel korn , a stocki , dark , flaccid man with a shapeless paunch , sat complet relax on one of the bench in the front row , hi hand clasp comfort over the top of hi bald and swarthi head . hi eye were amus behind hi glint rimless spectacl . “ we ’ re tri to be perfectli object about thi , ” he prompt colonel cathcart . “ we ’ re tri to be perfectli object about thi , ” colonel cathcart said to yossarian with the zeal of sudden inspir . “ it ’ s not that i ’ m be sentiment or anyth . i don ’ t give a damn about the men or the airplan . it ’ s just that it look so lousi on the report . how am i go to cover up someth like thi in the report ? ” “ whi don ’ t you give me a medal ? ” yossarian suggest timidli . “ for go around twice ? ” “ you gave one to hungri joe when he crack up that airplan by mistake. ” colonel cathcart snicker ruefulli . “ you ’ ll be lucki if we don ’ t give you a court-martial. ” “ but i got the bridg the second time around , ” yossarian protest . “ i thought you want the bridg destroyed. ” “ oh , i don ’ t know what i want , ” colonel cathcart cri out in exasper . “ look , of cours i want the bridg destroy . that bridg ha been a sourc of troubl to me ever sinc i decid to send you men out to get it . but whi couldn ’ t you do it the first time ? ” “ i didn ’ t have enough time . my navig wasn ’ t sure we had the right city. ” “ the right citi ? ” colonel cathcart wa baffl . “ are you tri to blame it all on aarfi now ? ” “ no , sir . it wa my mistak for let him distract me . all i ’ m tri to say is that i ’ m not infallible. ” “ nobodi is infal , ” colonel cathcart said sharpli , and then continu vagu , with an afterthought : “ nobodi is indispens , either. ” there wa no rebutt . colonel korn stretch sluggishli . “ we ’ ve got to reach a decis , ” he observ casual to colonel cathcart . “ we ’ ve got to reach a decis , ” colonel cathcart said to yossarian . “ and it ’ s all your fault . whi did you have to go around twice ? whi couldn ’ t you drop your bomb the first time like all the other ? ” “ i would have miss the first time. ” “ it seem to me that we ’ re go around twice , ” colonel korn interrupt with a chuckl . “ but what are we go to do ? ” colonel cathcart exclaim with distress . “ the other are all wait outside. ” “ whi don ’ t we give him a medal ? ” colonel korn propos . “ for go around twice ? what can we give him a medal for ? ” “ for go around twice , ” colonel korn answer with a reflect , self-satisfi smile . “ after all , i suppos it did take a lot of courag to go over that target a second time with no other plane around to divert the antiaircraft fire . and he did hit the bridg . you know , that might be the answer-to act boast about someth we ought to be asham of . that ’ s a trick that never seem to fail. ” “ do you think it will work ? ” “ i ’ m sure it will . and let ’ s promot him to captain , too , just to make certain. ” “ don ’ t you think that ’ s go a bit farther than we have to ? ” “ no , i don ’ t think so . it ’ s best to play safe . and a captain ’ s not much difference. ” “ all right , ” colonel cathcart decid . “ we ’ ll give him a medal for be brave enough to go around over the target twice . and we ’ ll make him a captain , too. ” colonel korn reach for hi hat . “ exit smile , ” he joke , and put hi arm around yossarian ’ s shoulder as they step outsid the door . 14 kid sampson by the time of the mission to bologna , yossarian wa brave enough not to go around over the target even onc , and when he found himself aloft final in the nose of kid sampson ’ s plane , he press in the button of hi throat mike and ask , “ well ? what ’ s wrong with the plane ? ” kid sampson let out a shriek . “ is someth wrong with the plane ? what ’ s the matter ? ” kid sampson ’ s cri turn yossarian to ice . “ is someth the matter ? ” he yell in horror . “ are we bail out ? ” “ i don ’ t know ! ” kid sampson shot back in anguish , wail excitedli . “ someon said we ’ re bail out ! who is thi , anyway ? who is thi ? ” “ thi is yossarian in the nose ! yossarian in the nose . i heard you say there wa someth the matter . didn ’ t you say there wa someth the matter ? ” “ i thought you said there wa someth wrong . everyth seem okay . everyth is all right. ” yossarian ’ s heart sank . someth wa terribl wrong if everyth wa all right and they had no excus for turn back . he hesit grave . “ i can ’ t hear you , ” he said . “ i said everyth is all right. ” the sun wa blind white on the porcelain-blu water below and on the flash edg of the other airplan . yossarian took hold of the color wire lead into the jackbox of the intercom system and tore them loos . “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” he said . he heard noth . slowli he collect hi map case and hi three flak suit and crawl back to the main compart . nate , sit stiffli in the co-pilot ’ s seat , spi him through the corner of hi eye as he step up on the flight deck behind kid sampson . he smile at yossarian wanli , look frail and except young and bash in the bulki dungeon of hi earphon , hat , throat mike , flak suit and parachut . yossarian bent close to kid sampson ’ s ear . “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” he shout abov the even drone of the engin . kid sampson glanc back at him with surpris . kid sampson had an angular , comic face with arch eyebrow and a scrawni blond mustach . “ what ? ” he call out over hi shoulder . “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” yossarian repeat . “ you ’ ll have to talk louder , ” kid sampson said . “ i still can ’ t hear you. ” “ i said i still can ’ t hear you ! ” yossarian yell . “ i can ’ t help it , ” kid sampson yell back at him . “ i ’ m shout as loud as i can. ” “ i couldn ’ t hear you over my intercom , ” yossarian bellow in mount helpless . “ you ’ ll have to turn back. ” “ for an intercom ? ” ask kid sampson incredul . “ turn back , ” said yossarian , “ befor i break your head. ” kid sampson look for moral support toward nate , who stare away from him pointedli . yossarian outrank them both . kid sampson resist doubt for anoth moment and then capitul eagerli with a triumphant whoop . “ that ’ s just fine with me , ” he announc gladli , and blew out a shrill seri of whistl up into hi mustach . “ ye sirre , that ’ s just fine with old kid sampson. ” he whistl again and shout over the intercom , “ now hear thi , my littl chickade . thi is admir kid sampson talk . thi is admir kid sampson squawk , the pride of the queen ’ s marin . yessire . we ’ re turn back , boy , by cracke , we ’ re turn back ! ” nate rip off hi hat and earphon in one jubil sweep and began rock back and forth happili like a handsom child in a high chair . sergeant knight came plummet down from the top gun turret and began pound them all on the back with deliri enthusiasm . kid sampson turn the plane away from the format in a wide , grace arc and head toward the airfield . when yossarian plug hi headset into one of the auxiliari jackbox , the two gunner in the rear section of the plane were both sing “ la cucaracha. ” back at the field , the parti fizzl out abruptli . an uneasi silenc replac it , and yossarian wa sober and self-consci as he climb down from the plane and took hi place in the jeep that wa alreadi wait for them . none of the men spoke at all on the drive back through the heavi , mesmer quiet blanket mountain , sea and forest . the feel of desol persist when they turn off the road at the squadron . yossarian got out of the car last . after a minut , yossarian and a gentl warm wind were the onli thing stir in the haunt tranquil that hung like a drug over the vacat tent . the squadron stood insens , bereft of everyth human but doc daneeka , who roost dolor like a shiver turkey buzzard besid the close door of the medic tent , hi stuf nose jab away in thirst futil at the hazi sunlight stream down around him . yossarian knew doc daneeka would not go swim with him . doc daneeka would never go swim again ; a person could swoon or suffer a mild coronari occlus in an inch or two of water and drown to death , be carri out to sea by an undertow , or made vulner to poliomyel or meningococcu infect through chill or over-exert . the threat of bologna to other had instil in doc daneeka an even more poignant solicitud for hi own safeti . at night now , he heard burglar . through the lavend gloom cloud the entranc of the oper tent , yossarian glimps chief white halfoat , dilig embezzl whiskey ration , forg the signatur of nondrink and pour off the alcohol with which he wa poison himself into separ bottl rapidli in order to steal as much as he could befor captain black rous himself with recollect and came hurri over indol to steal the rest himself . the jeep start up again softli . kid sampson , nate and the other wander apart in a noiseless eddi of motion and were suck away into the cloy yellow still . the jeep vanish with a cough . yossarian wa alon in a ponder , primev lull in which everyth green look black and everyth els wa imbu with the color of pu . the breez rustl leav in a dri and diaphan distanc . he wa restless , scare and sleepi . the socket of hi eye felt grimi with exhaust . wearili he move insid the parachut tent with it long tabl of smooth wood , a nag bitch of a doubt burrow painlessli insid a conscienc that felt perfectli clear . he left hi flak suit and parachut there and cross back past the water wagon to the intellig tent to return hi map case to captain black , who sat drows in hi chair with hi skinni long leg up on hi desk and inquir with indiffer curios whi yossarian ’ s plane had turn back . yossarian ignor him . he set the map down on the counter and walk out . back in hi own tent , he squirm out of hi parachut har and then out of hi cloth . orr wa in rome , due back that same afternoon from the rest leav he had won by ditch hi plane in the water off genoa . nate would alreadi be pack to replac him , entranc to find himself still aliv and undoubtedli impati to resum hi wast and heartbreak courtship of hi prostitut in rome . when yossarian wa undress , he sat down on hi cot to rest . he felt much better as soon as he wa nake . he never felt comfort in cloth . in a littl while he put fresh undershort back on and set out for the beach in hi moccasin , a khaki-color bath towel drape over hi shoulder . the path from the squadron led him around a mysteri gun emplac in the wood ; two of the three enlist men station there lay sleep on the circl of sand bag and the third sat eat a purpl pomegran , bite off larg mouth between hi churn jaw and spew the ground roughag out away from him into the bush . when he bit , red juic ran out of hi mouth . yossarian pad ahead into the forest again , caress hi bare , tingl belli adoringli from time to time as though to reassur himself it wa all still there . he roll a piec of lint out of hi navel . along the ground suddenli , on both side of the path , he saw dozen of new mushroom the rain had spawn poke their nodular finger up through the clammi earth like lifeless stalk of flesh , sprout in such necrot profus everywher he look that they seem to be prolifer right befor hi eye . there were thousand of them swarm as far back into the underbrush as he could see , and they appear to swell in size and multipli in number as he spi them . he hurri away from them with a shiver of eeri alarm and did not slacken hi pace until the soil crumbl to dri sand beneath hi feet and they had been left behind . he glanc back apprehens , half expect to find the limp white thing crawl after him in sightless pursuit or snake up through the treetop in a writh and ungovern mut mass . the beach wa desert . the onli sound were hush one , the bloat gurgl of the stream , the respir hum of the tall grass and shrub behind him , the apathet moan of the dumb , transluc wave . the surf wa alway small , the water clear and cool . yossarian left hi thing on the sand and move through the knee-high wave until he wa complet immers . on the other side of the sea , a bumpi sliver of dark land lay wrap in mist , almost invis . he swam languor out to the raft , held on a moment , and swam languor back to where he could stand on the sand bar . he submerg himself head first into the green water sever time until he felt clean and wide-awak and then stretch himself out face down in the sand and slept until the plane return from bologna were almost overhead and the great , cumul rumbl of their mani engin came crash in through hi slumber in an earth-shatt roar . he woke up blink with a slight pain in hi head and open hi eye upon a world boil in chao in which everyth wa in proper order . he gasp in utter amaz at the fantast sight of the twelv flight of plane organ calmli into exact format . the scene wa too unexpect to be true . there were no plane spurt ahead with wound , none lag behind with damag . no distress flare smoke in the sky . no ship wa miss but hi own . for an instant he wa paralyz with a sensat of mad . then he understood , and almost wept at the ironi . the explan wa simpl : cloud had cover the target befor the plane could bomb it , and the mission to bologna wa still to be flown . he wa wrong . there had been no cloud . bologna had been bomb . bologna wa a milk run . there had been no flak there at all . 15 piltchard amp ; wren captain piltchard and captain wren , the inoffens joint squadron oper offic , were both mild , soft-spoken men of less than middl height who enjoy fli combat mission and beg noth more of life and colonel cathcart than the opportun to continu fli them . they had flown hundr of combat mission and want to fli hundr more . they assign themselv to everi one . noth so wonder as war had ever happen to them befor ; and they were afraid it might never happen to them again . they conduct their duti humbl and retic , with a minimum of fuss , and went to great length not to antagon anyon . they smile quickli at everyon they pass . when they spoke , they mumbl . they were shifti , cheer , subservi men who were comfort onli with each other and never met anyon els ’ s eye , not even yossarian ’ s eye at the open-air meet they call to reprimand him publicli for make kid sampson turn back from the mission to bologna . “ fella , ” said captain piltchard , who had thin dark hair and smile awkwardli . “ when you turn back from a mission , tri to make sure it ’ s for someth import , will you ? not for someth unimportant… like a defect intercom… or someth like that . okay ? captain wren ha more he want to say to you on that subject. ” “ captain piltchard ’ s right , fella , ” said captain wren . “ and that ’ s all i ’ m go to say to you on that subject . well , we final got to bologna today , and we found out it ’ s a milk run . we were all a littl nervou , i guess , and didn ’ t do too much damag . well , listen to thi . colonel cathcart got permiss for us to go back . and tomorrow we ’ re realli go to past those ammunit dump . now , what do you think about that ? ” and to prove to yossarian that they bore him no animos , they even assign him to fli lead bombardi with mcwatt in the first format when they went back to bologna the next day . he came in on the target like a havermey , confid take no evas action at all , and suddenli they were shoot the live shit out of him ! heavi flak wa everywher ! he had been lull , lure and trap , and there wa noth he could do but sit there like an idiot and watch the ugli black puff smash up to kill him . there wa noth he could do until hi bomb drop but look back into the bombsight , where the fine cross-hair in the len were glu magnet over the target exactli where he had place them , intersect perfectli deep insid the yard of hi block of camouflag warehous befor the base of the first build . he wa trembl steadili as the plane crept ahead . he could hear the hollow boom-boom-boom-boom of the flak pound all around him in overlap measur of four , the sharp , pierc crack ! of a singl shell explod suddenli veri close by . hi head wa burst with a thousand disson impuls as he pray for the bomb to drop . he want to sob . the engin drone on monoton like a fat , lazi fli . at last the indic on the bombsight cross , trip away the eight 500-pounder one after the other . the plane lurch upward buoyantli with the lighten load . yossarian bent away from the bombsight crookedli to watch the indic on hi left . when the pointer touch zero , he close the bomb bay door and , over the intercom , at the veri top of hi voic , shriek : “ turn right hard ! ” mcwatt respond instantli . with a grind howl of engin , he flip the plane over on one wing and wrung it around remorselessli in a scream turn away from the twin spire of flak yossarian had spi stab toward them . then yossarian had mcwatt climb and keep climb higher and higher until they tore free final into a calm , diamond-blu sky that wa sunni and pure everywher and lace in the distanc with long white veil of tenuou fluff . the wind strum soothingli against the cylindr pane of hi window , and he relax exultantli onli until they pick up speed again and then turn mcwatt left and plung him right back down , notic with a transitori spasm of elat the mushroom cluster of flak leap open high abov him and back over hi shoulder to the right , exactli where he could have been if he had not turn left and dive . he level mcwatt out with anoth harsh cri and whip him upward and around again into a rag blue patch of unpollut air just as the bomb he had drop began to strike . the first one fell in the yard , exactli where he had aim , and then the rest of the bomb from hi own plane and from the other plane in hi flight burst open on the ground in a charg of rapid orang flash across the top of the build , which collaps instantli in a vast , churn wave of pink and gray and coal-black smoke that went roll out turbul in all direct and quak convuls in it bowel as though from great blast of red and white and golden sheet lightn . “ well , will you look at that , ” aarfi marvel sonor right besid yossarian , hi plump , orbicular face sparkl with a look of bright enchant . “ there must have been an ammunit dump down there. ” yossarian had forgotten about aarfi . “ get out ! ” he shout at him . “ get out of the nose ! ” aarfi smile polit and point down toward the target in a gener invit for yossarian to look . yossarian began slap at him insist and signal wildli toward the entranc of the crawlway . “ get back in the ship ! ” he cri frantic . “ get back in the ship ! ” aarfi shrug amiabl . “ i can ’ t hear you , ” he explain . yossarian seiz him by the strap of hi parachut har and push him backward toward the crawlway just as the plane wa hit with a jar concuss that rattl hi bone and made hi heart stop . he knew at onc they were all dead . “ climb ! ” he scream into the intercom at mcwatt when he saw he wa still aliv . “ climb , you bastard ! climb , climb , climb , climb ! ” the plane zoom upward again in a climb that wa swift and strain , until he level it out with anoth harsh shout at mcwatt and wrench it around onc more in a roar , merciless forty-five-degre turn that suck hi insid out in one enerv sniff and left him float fleshless in mid-air until he level mcwatt out again just long enough to hurl him back around toward the right and then down into a screech dive . through endless blob of ghostli black smoke he sped , the hang smut waft against the smooth plexiglass nose of the ship like an evil , damp , sooti vapor against hi cheek . hi heart wa hammer again in ach terror as he hurtl upward and downward through the blind gang of flak charg murder into the sky at him , then sag inertli . sweat gush from hi neck in torrent and pour down over hi chest and waist with the feel of warm slime . he wa vagu awar for an instant that the plane in hi format were no longer there , and then he wa awar of onli himself . hi throat hurt like a raw slash from the strangl intens with which he shriek each command to mcwatt . the engin rose to a deafen , agon , ulul bellow each time mcwatt chang direct . and far out in front the burst of flak were still swarm into the sky from new batteri of gun poke around for accur altitud as they wait sadist for him to fli into rang . the plane wa slam again suddenli with anoth loud , jar explos that almost rock it over on it back , and the nose fill immedi with sweet cloud of blue smoke . someth wa on fire ! yossarian whirl to escap and smack into aarfi , who had struck a match and wa placidli light hi pipe . yossarian gape at hi grin , moon-fac navig in utter shock and confus . it occur to him that one of them wa mad . “ jesu christ ! ” he scream at aarfi in tortur amaz . “ get the hell out of the nose ! are you crazi ? get out ! ” “ what ? ” said aarfi . “ get out ! ” yossarian yell hyster , and began club aarfi backhand with both fist to drive him away . “ get out ! ” “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” aarfi call back innoc with an express of mild and reprov perplex . “ you ’ ll have to talk a littl louder. ” “ get out of the nose ! ” yossarian shriek in frustrat . “ they ’ re tri to kill us ! don ’ t you understand ? they ’ re tri to kill us ! ” “ which way should i go , goddam it ? ” mcwatt shout furious over the intercom in a suffer , high-pitch voic . “ which way should i go ? ” “ turn left ! left , you goddam dirti son of a bitch ! turn left hard ! ” aarfi crept up close behind yossarian and jab him sharpli in the rib with the stem of hi pipe . yossarian flew up toward the ceil with a whinni cri , then jump complet around on hi knee , white as a sheet and quiver with rage . aarfi wink encouragingli and jerk hi thumb back toward mcwatt with a humor moue . “ what ’ s eat him ? ” he ask with a laugh . yossarian wa struck with a weird sens of distort . “ will you get out of here ? ” he yelp beseechingli , and shove aarfi over with all hi strength . “ are you deaf or someth ? get back in the plane ! ” and to mcwatt he scream , “ dive ! dive ! ” down they sank onc more into the crunch , thud , volumin barrag of burst antiaircraft shell as aarfi came creep back behind yossarian and jab him sharpli in the rib again . yossarian shi upward with anoth whinni gasp . “ i still couldn ’ t hear you , ” aarfi said . “ i said get out of here ! ” yossarian shout , and broke into tear . he began punch aarfi in the bodi with both hand as hard as he could . “ get away from me ! get away ! ” punch aarfi wa like sink hi fist into a limp sack of inflat rubber . there wa no resist , no respons at all from the soft , insensit mass , and after a while yossarian ’ s spirit die and hi arm drop helplessli with exhaust . he wa overcom with a humili feel of impot and wa readi to weep in self-piti . “ what did you say ? ” aarfi ask . “ get away from me , ” yossarian answer , plead with him now . “ go back in the plane. ” “ i still can ’ t hear you. ” “ never mind , ” wail yossarian , “ never mind . just leav me alone. ” “ never mind what ? ” yossarian began hit himself in the forehead . he seiz aarfi by the shirt front and , struggl to hi feet for traction , drag him to the rear of the nose compart and flung him down like a bloat and unwieldi bag in the entranc of the crawlway . a shell bang open with a stupend clout right besid hi ear as he wa scrambl back toward the front , and some undestroy recess of hi intellig wonder that it did not kill them all . they were climb again . the engin were howl again as though in pain , and the air insid the plane wa acrid with the smell of machineri and fetid with the stench of gasolin . the next thing he knew , it wa snow ! thousand of tini bit of white paper were fall like snowflak insid the plane , mill around hi head so thickli that they clung to hi eyelash when he blink in astonish and flutter against hi nostril and lip each time he inhal . when he spun around in hi bewilder , aarfi wa grin proudli from ear to ear like someth inhuman as he held up a shatter paper map for yossarian to see . a larg chunk of flak had rip up from the floor through aarfi ’ s coloss jumbl of map and had rip out through the ceil inch away from their head . aarfi ’ s joy wa sublim . “ will you look at thi ? ” he murmur , waggl two of hi stubbi finger play into yossarian ’ s face through the hole in one of hi map . “ will you look at thi ? ” yossarian wa dumbfound by hi state of raptur content . aarfi wa like an eeri ogr in a dream , incap of be bruis or evad , and yossarian dread him for a complex of reason he wa too petrifi to untangl . wind whistl up through the jag gash in the floor kept the myriad bit of paper circul like alabast particl in a paperweight and contribut to a sensat of lacquer , waterlog unreal . everyth seem strang , so tawdri and grotesqu . hi head wa throb from a shrill clamor that drill relentlessli into both ear . it wa mcwatt , beg for direct in an incoher frenzi . yossarian continu stare in torment fascin at aarfi ’ s spheric counten beam at him so seren and vacantli through the drift whorl of white paper bit and conclud that he wa a rave lunat just as eight burst of flak broke open success at eye level off to the right , then eight more , and then eight more , the last group pull over toward the left so that they were almost directli in front . “ turn left hard ! ” he holler to mcwatt , as aarfi kept grin , and mcwatt did turn left hard , but the flak turn left hard with them , catch up fast , and yossarian holler , “ i said hard , hard , hard , hard , you bastard , hard ! ” and mcwatt bent the plane around even harder still , and suddenli , miracul , they were out of rang . the flak end . the gun stop boom at them . and they were aliv . behind him , men were die . strung out for mile in a stricken , tortuou , squirm line , the other flight of plane were make the same hazard journey over the target , thread their swift way through the swollen mass of new and old burst of flak like rat race in a pack through their own drop . one wa on fire , and flap lame off by itself , billow gigant like a monstrou blood-r star . as yossarian watch , the burn plane float over on it side and began spiral down slowli in wide , tremul , narrow circl , it huge flame burden blaze orang and flare out in back like a long , swirl cape of fire and smoke . there were parachut , one , two , three… four , and then the plane gyrat into a spin and fell the rest of the way to the ground , flutter insens insid it vivid pyre like a shred of color tissu paper . one whole flight of plane from anoth squadron had been blast apart . yossarian sigh barrenli , hi day ’ s work done . he wa listless and sticki . the engin croon melliflu as mcwatt throttl back to loiter and allow the rest of the plane in hi flight to catch up . the abrupt still seem alien and artifici , a littl insidi . yossarian unsnap hi flak suit and took off hi helmet . he sigh again , restlessli , and close hi eye and tri to relax . “ where ’ s orr ? ” someon ask suddenli over hi intercom . yossarian bound up with a one-syl cri that crackl with anxieti and provid the onli ration explan for the whole mysteri phenomenon of the flak at bologna : orr ! he lung forward over the bombsight to search downward through the plexiglass for some reassur sign of orr , who drew flak like a magnet and who had undoubtedli attract the crack batteri of the whole hermann goer divis to bologna overnight from wherev the hell they had been station the day befor when orr wa still in rome . aarfi launch himself forward an instant later and crack yossarian on the bridg of the nose with the sharp rim of hi flak helmet . yossarian curs him as hi eye flood with tear . “ there he is , ” aarfi orat funer , point down dramat at a hay wagon and two hors stand befor the barn of a gray stone farmhous . “ smash to bit . i guess their number were all up. ” yossarian swore at aarfi again and continu search intent , cold with a compassion kind of fear now for the littl bounci and bizarr buck-tooth tentmat who had smash applebi ’ s forehead open with a ping-pong racket and who wa scare the daylight out of yossarian onc again . at last yossarian spot the two-engin , twin-rudd plane as it flew out of the green background of the forest over a field of yellow farmland . one of the propel wa feather and perfectli still , but the plane wa maintain altitud and hold a proper cours . yossarian mutter an unconsci prayer of thank and then flare up at orr savag in a rant fusion of resent and relief . “ that bastard ! ” he began . “ that goddam stunt , red-fac , big-cheek , curly-head , buck-tooth rat bastard son of a bitch ! ” “ what ? ” said aarfi . “ that dirti goddam midget-ass , apple-cheek , goggle-ey , unders , buck-tooth , grin , crazi sonofabitchin-bastard ! ” yossarian sputter . “ what ? ” “ never mind ! ” “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” aarfi answer . yossarian swung himself around method to face aarfi . “ you prick , ” he began . “ me ? ” “ you pompou , rotund , neighborli , vacuou , complacent… ” aarfi wa unperturb . calmli he struck a wooden match and suck noisili at hi pipe with an eloqu air of benign and magnanim forgiv . he smile sociabl and open hi mouth to speak . yossarian put hi hand over aarfi ’ s mouth and push him away wearili . he shut hi eye and pretend to sleep all the way back to the field so that he would not have to listen to aarfi or see him . at the brief room yossarian made hi intellig report to captain black and then wait in mutter suspens with all the other until orr chug into sight overhead final with hi one good engin still keep him aloft game . nobodi breath . orr ’ s land gear would not come down . yossarian hung around onli until orr had crash-land safe , and then stole the first jeep he could find with a key in the ignit and race back to hi tent to begin pack feverishli for the emerg rest leav he had decid to take in rome , where he found luciana and her invis scar that same night . 16 luciana he found luciana sit alon at a tabl in the alli offic ’ night club , where the drunken anzac major who had brought her there had been stupid enough to desert her for the ribald compani of some sing comrad at the bar . “ all right , i ’ ll danc with you , ” she said , befor yossarian could even speak . “ but i won ’ t let you sleep with me. ” “ who ask you ? ” yossarian ask her . “ you don ’ t want to sleep with me ? ” she exclaim with surpris . “ i don ’ t want to danc with you. ” she seiz yossarian ’ s hand and pull him out on the danc floor . she wa a wors dancer than even he wa , but she threw herself about to the synthet jitterbug music with more uninhibit pleasur than he had ever observ until he felt hi leg fall asleep with boredom and yank her off the danc floor toward the tabl at which the girl he should have been screw wa still sit tipsili with one hand around aarfi ’ s neck , her orang satin blous still hang open slovenli below her full white laci brassièr as she made dirti sex talk ostentati with hupl , orr , kid sampson and hungri joe . just as he reach them , luciana gave him a forc , unexpect shove that carri them both well beyond the tabl , so that they were still alon . she wa a tall , earthi , exuber girl with long hair and a pretti face , a buxom , delight , flirtati girl . “ all right , ” she said , “ i will let you buy me dinner . but i won ’ t let you sleep with me. ” “ who ask you ? ” yossarian ask with surpris . “ you don ’ t want to sleep with me ? ” “ i don ’ t want to buy you dinner. ” she pull him out of the night club into the street and down a flight of step into a black-market restaur fill with live , chirp , attract girl who all seem to know each other and with the self-consci militari offic from differ countri who had come there with them . the food wa eleg and expens , and the aisl were overflow with great stream of flush and merri proprietor , all stout and bald . the bustl interior radiat with enorm , engulf wave of fun and warmth . yossarian got a tremend kick out of the rude gusto with which luciana ignor him complet while she shovel away her whole meal with both hand . she ate like a hors until the last plate wa clean , and then she place her silverwar down with an air of conclus and settl back lazili in her chair with a dreami and congest look of sate gluttoni . she drew a deep , smile , content breath and regard him amor with a melt gaze . “ okay , joe , ” she pur , her glow dark eye drowsi and grate . “ now i will let you sleep with me. ” “ my name is yossarian. ” “ okay , yossarian , ” she answer with a soft repent laugh . “ now i will let you sleep with me. ” “ who ask you ? ” said yossarian . luciana wa stun . “ you don ’ t want to sleep with me ? ” yossarian nod emphat , laugh , and shot hi hand up under her dress . the girl came to life with a horrifi start . she jerk her leg away from him instantli , whip her bottom around . blush with alarm and embarrass , she push her skirt back down with a number of prim , sidelong glanc about the restaur . “ now i will let you sleep with me , ” she explain cautious in a manner of apprehens indulg . “ but not now. ” “ i know . when we get back to my room. ” the girl shook her head , eye him mistrust and keep her knee press togeth . “ no , now i must go home to my mamma , becaus my mamma doe not like me to danc with soldier or let them take me to dinner , and she will be veri angri with me if i do not come home now . but i will let you write down for me where you live . and tomorrow morn i will come to your room for ficky-fick befor i go to my work at the french offic . capisci ? ” “ bullshit ! ” yossarian exclaim with angri disappoint . “ cosa vuol dire bullshit ? ” luciana inquir with a blank look . yossarian broke into loud laughter . he answer her final in a tone of sympathet good humor . “ it mean that i want to escort you now to wherev the hell i have to take you next so that i can rush back to that night club befor aarfi leav with that wonder tomato he ’ s got without give me a chanc to ask about an aunt or friend she must have who ’ s just like her. ” “ come ? ” “ subito , subito , ” he taunt her tenderli . “ mamma is wait . rememb ? ” “ si , si . mamma. ” yossarian let the girl drag him through the love roman spring night for almost a mile until they reach a chaotic bu depot honk with horn , blaze with red and yellow light and echo with the snarl vituper of unshaven bu driver pour loathsom , hair-rais curs out at each other , at their passeng and at the stroll , unconcern knot of pedestrian clog their path , who ignor them until they were bump by the buse and began shout curs back . luciana vanish aboard one of the diminut green vehicl , and yossarian hurri as fast as he could all the way back to the cabaret and the bleary-ey bleach blond in the open orang satin blous . she seem infatu with aarfi , but he pray intens for her lusciou aunt as he ran , or for a lusciou girl friend , sister , cousin , or mother who wa just as libidin and deprav . she would have been perfect for yossarian , a debauch , coars , vulgar , amor , appet slattern whom he had long for and idol for month . she wa a real find . she paid for her own drink , and she had an automobil , an apart and a salmon-color cameo ring that drove hungri joe clean out of hi sens with it exquisit carv figur of a nake boy and girl on a rock . hungri joe snort and pranc and paw at the floor in saliv lust and grovel need , but the girl would not sell him the ring , even though he offer her all the money in all their pocket and hi complic black camera thrown in . she wa not interest in money or camera . she wa interest in fornic . she wa gone when yossarian got there . they were all gone , and he walk right out and move in wist deject through the dark , empti street . yossarian wa not often lone when he wa by himself , but he wa lone now in hi keen envi of aarfi , who he knew wa in bed that veri moment with the girl who wa just right for yossarian , and who could also make out ani time he want to , if he ever want to , with either or both of the two slender , stun , aristocrat women who live in the apart upstair and fructifi yossarian ’ s sex fantasi whenev he had sex fantasi , the beauti rich black-hair countess with the red , wet , nervou lip and her beauti rich black-hair daughter-in-law . yossarian wa madli in love with all of them as he made hi way back to the offic ’ apart , in love with luciana , with the prurient intox girl in the unbutton satin blous , and with the beauti rich countess and her beauti rich daughter-in-law , both of whom would never let him touch them or even flirt with them . they dote kittenishli on nate and defer passiv to aarfi , but they thought yossarian wa crazi and recoil from him with distast contempt each time he made an indec propos or tri to fondl them when they pass on the stair . they were both superb creatur with pulpi , bright , point tongu and mouth like round warm plum , a littl sweet and sticki , a littl rotten . they had class ; yossarian wa not sure what class wa , but he knew that they had it and he did not , and that they knew it , too . he could pictur , as he walk , the kind of undercloth they wore against their svelt feminin part , filmi , smooth , cling garment of deepest black or of opalesc pastel radianc with flower lace border fragrant with the tantal fume of pamper flesh and scent bath salt rise in a germin cloud from their blue-whit breast . he wish again that he wa where aarfi wa , make obscen , brutal , cheer love with a juici drunken tart who didn ’ t give a tinker ’ s dam about him and would never think of him again . but aarfi wa alreadi back in the apart when yossarian arriv , and yossarian gape at him with that same sens of persecut astonish he had suffer that same morn over bologna at hi malign and cabalist and irremov presenc in the nose of the plane . “ what are you do here ? ” he ask . “ that ’ s right , ask him ! ” hungri joe exclaim in a rage . “ make him tell you what he ’ s do here ! ” with a long , theatric moan , kid sampson made a pistol of hi thumb and forefing and blew hi own brain out . hupl , chew away on a bulg wad of bubbl gum , drank everyth in with a callow , vacant express on hi fifteen-year old face . aarfi wa tap the bowl of hi pipe against hi palm leisur as he pace back and forth in corpul self-approv , obvious delight by the stir he wa caus . “ didn ’ t you go home with that girl ? ” yossarian demand . “ oh , sure , i went home with her , ” aarfi repli . “ you didn ’ t think i wa go to let her tri to find her way home alon , did you ? ” “ wouldn ’ t she let you stay with her ? ” “ oh , she want me to stay with her , all right. ” aarfi chuckl . “ don ’ t you worri about good old aarfi . but i wasn ’ t go to take advantag of a sweet kid like that just becaus she ’ d had a littl too much to drink . what kind of a guy do you think i am ? ” “ who said anyth about take advantag of her ? ” yossarian rail at him in amaz . “ all she want to do wa get into bed with someon . that ’ s the onli thing she kept talk about all night long. ” “ that ’ s becaus she wa a littl mix up , ” aarfi explain . “ but i gave her a littl talk to and realli put some sens into her. ” “ you bastard ! ” yossarian exclaim , and sank down tiredli on the divan besid kid sampson . “ whi the hell didn ’ t you give her to one of us if you didn ’ t want her ? ” “ you see ? ” hungri joe ask . “ there ’ s someth wrong with him. ” yossarian nod and look at aarfi curious . “ aarfi , tell me someth . don ’ t you ever screw ani of them ? ” aarfi chuckl again with conceit amus . “ oh sure , i prod them . don ’ t you worri about me . but never ani nice girl . i know what kind of girl to prod and what kind of girl not to prod , and i never prod ani nice girl . thi one wa a sweet kid . you could see her famili had money . whi , i even got her to throw that ring of her away right out the car window. ” hungri joe flew into the air with a screech of intoler pain . “ you did what ? ” he scream . “ you did what ? ” he began whale away at aarfi ’ s shoulder and arm with both fist , almost in tear . “ i ought to kill you for what you did , you lousi bastard . he ’ s sin , that ’ s what he is . he ’ s got a dirti mind , ain ’ t he ? ain ’ t he got a dirti mind ? ” “ the dirtiest , ” yossarian agre . “ what are you fellow talk about ? ” aarfi ask with genuin puzzlement , tuck hi face away protect insid the cushion insul of hi oval shoulder . “ aw , come on , joe , ” he plead with a smile of mild discomfort . “ quit punch me , will you ? ” but hungri joe would not quit punch until yossarian pick him up and push him away toward hi bedroom . yossarian move listlessli into hi own room , undress and went to sleep . a second later it wa morn , and someon wa shake him . “ what are you wake me up for ? ” he whimper . it wa michaela , the skinni maid with the merri disposit and home sallow face , and she wa wake him up becaus he had a visitor wait just outsid the door . luciana ! he could hardli believ it . and she wa alon in the room with him after michaela had depart , love , hale and statuesqu , steam and rippl with an irrepress affection vital even as she remain in one place and frown at him irat . she stood like a youth femal colossu with her magnific columnar leg apart on high white shoe with wedg heel , wear a pretti green dress and swing a larg , flat white leather pocketbook , with which she crack him hard across the face when he leap out of bed to grab her . yossarian stagger backward out of rang in a daze , clutch hi sting cheek with bewilder . “ pig ! ” she spat out at him vicious , her nostril flare in a look of savag disdain . “ vive com ’ un animal ! ” with a fierc , guttur , scorn , disgust oath , she strode across the room and threw open the three tall casement window , let insid an effulg flood of sunlight and crisp fresh air that wash through the stuffi room like an invigor tonic . she place her pocketbook on a chair and began tidi the room , pick hi thing up from the floor and off the top of the furnitur , throw hi sock , handkerchief and underwear into an empti drawer of the dresser and hang hi shirt and trouser up in the closet . yossarian ran out of the bedroom into the bathroom and brush hi teeth . he wash hi hand and face and comb hi hair . when he ran back , the room wa in order and luciana wa almost undress . her express wa relax . she left her ear on the dresser and pad barefoot to the bed wear just a pink rayon chemis that came down to her hip . she glanc about the room prudent to make certain there wa noth she had overlook in the way of neat and then drew back the coverlet and stretch herself out luxuri with an express of felin expect . she beckon to him longingli , with a huski laugh . “ now , ” she announc in a whisper , hold both arm out to him eagerli . “ now i will let you sleep with me. ” she told him some lie about a singl weekend in bed with a slaughter fiancé in the italian armi , and they all turn out to be true , for she cri , “ finito ! ” almost as soon as he start and wonder whi he didn ’ t stop , until he had finito too and explain to her . he lit cigarett for both of them . she wa enchant by the deep suntan cover hi whole bodi . he wonder about the pink chemis that she would not remov . it wa cut like a man ’ s undershirt , with narrow shoulder strap , and conceal the invis scar on her back that she refus to let him see after he had made her tell him it wa there . she grew tens as fine steel when he trace the mutil contour with hi fingertip from a pit in her shoulder blade almost to the base of her spine . he winc at the mani tortur night she had spent in the hospit , drug or in pain , with the ubiquit , ineradic odor of ether , fecal matter and disinfect , of human flesh mortifi and decay amid the white uniform , the rubbersol shoe , and the eeri night light glow dimli until dawn in the corridor . she had been wound in an air raid . “ dove ? ” he ask , and he held hi breath in suspens . “ napoli. ” “ german ? ” “ americani. ” hi heart crack , and he fell in love . he wonder if she would marri him . “ tu sei pazzo , ” she told him with a pleasant laugh . “ whi am i crazi ? ” he ask . “ perchè non posso sposare. ” “ whi can ’ t you get marri ? ” “ becaus i am not a virgin , ” she answer . “ what ha that got to do with it ? ” “ who will marri me ? no one want a girl who is not a virgin. ” “ i will . i ’ ll marri you. ” “ ma non posso sposarti. ” “ whi can ’ t you marri me ? ” “ perchè sei pazzo. ” “ whi am i crazi ? ” “ perchè vuoi sposarmi. ” yossarian wrinkl hi forehead with quizzic amus . “ you won ’ t marri me becaus i ’ m crazi , and you say i ’ m crazi becaus i want to marri you ? is that right ? ” “ si. ” “ tu sei pazz ’ ! ” he told her loudli . “ perchè ? ” she shout back at him indignantli , her unavoid round breast rise and fall in a sauci huff beneath the pink chemis as she sat up in bed indignantli . “ whi am i crazi ? ” “ becaus you won ’ t marri me. ” “ stupido ! ” she shout back at him , and smack him loudli and flamboyantli on the chest with the back of her hand . “ non posso sposarti ! non capisci ? non posso sposarti. ” “ oh , sure , i understand . and whi can ’ t you marri me ? ” “ perchè sei pazzo ! ” “ and whi am i crazi ? ” “ perchè vuoi sposarmi. ” “ becaus i want to marri you . carina , ti amo , ” he explain , and he drew her gentli back down to the pillow . “ ti amo molto. ” “ tu sei pazzo , ” she murmur in repli , flatter . “ perchè ? ” “ becaus you say you love me . how can you love a girl who is not a virgin ? ” “ becaus i can ’ t marri you. ” she bolt right up again in a threaten rage . “ whi can ’ t you marri me ? ” she demand , readi to clout him again if he gave an uncomplimentari repli . “ just becaus i am not a virgin ? ” “ no , no , darl . becaus you ’ re crazy. ” she stare at him in blank resent for a moment and then toss her head back and roar appreci with hearti laughter . she gaze at him with new approv when she stop , the lush , respons tissu of her dark face turn darker still and bloom somnol with a swell and beautifi infus of blood . her eye grew dim . he crush out both their cigarett , and they turn into each other wordlessli in an engross kiss just as hungri joe came meander into the room without knock to ask if yossarian want to go out with him to look for girl . hungri joe stop on a dime when he saw them and shot out of the room . yossarian shot out of bed even faster and began shout at luciana to get dress . the girl wa dumbfound . he pull her roughli out of bed by her arm and flung her away toward her cloth , then race for the door in time to slam it shut as hungri joe wa run back in with hi camera . hungri joe had hi leg wedg in the door and would not pull it out . “ let me in ! ” he beg urgent , wriggl and squirm maniac . “ let me in ! ” he stop struggl for a moment to gaze up into yossarian ’ s face through the crack in the door with what he must have suppos wa a beguil smile . “ me no hungri joe , ” he explain earnestli . “ me heap big photograph from life magazin . heap big pictur on heap big cover . i make you big hollywood star , yossarian . multi dinero . multi divorc . multi ficky-f all day long . si , si , si ! ” yossarian slam the door shut when hungri joe step back a bit to tri to shoot a pictur of luciana dress . hungri joe attack the stout wooden barrier fanat , fell back to reorgan hi energi and hurl himself forward fanat again . yossarian slither into hi own cloth between assault . luciana had her green-and-whit summer dress on and wa hold the skirt bunch up abov her waist . a wave of miseri broke over him as he saw her about to vanish insid her panti forev . he reach out to grasp her and drew her to him by the rais calf of her leg . she hop forward and mold herself against him . yossarian kiss her ear and her close eye romant and rub the back of her thigh . she began to hum sensual a moment befor hungri joe hurl hi frail bodi against the door in still one more desper attack and almost knock them both down . yossarian push her away . “ vite ! vite ! ” he scold her . “ get your thing on ! ” “ what the hell are you talk about ? ” she want to know . “ fast ! fast ! can ’ t you understand english ? get your cloth on fast ! ” “ stupido ! ” she snarl back at him . “ vite is french , not italian . subito , subito ! that ’ s what you mean . subito ! ” “ si , si . that ’ s what i mean . subito , subito ! ” “ si , si , ” she respond co-op , and ran for her shoe and ear . hungri joe had paus in hi attack to shoot pictur through the close door . yossarian could hear the camera shutter click . when both he and luciana were readi , yossarian wait for hungri joe ’ s next charg and yank the door open on him unexpectedli . hungri joe spill forward into the room like a flounder frog . yossarian skip nimbl around him , guid luciana along behind him through the apart and out into the hallway . they bounc down the stair with a great roister clatter , laugh out loud breathlessli and knock their hilari head togeth each time they paus to rest . near the bottom they met nate come up and stop laugh . nate wa drawn , dirti and unhappi . hi tie wa twist and hi shirt wa rumpl , and he walk with hi hand in hi pocket . he wore a hangdog , hopeless look . “ what ’ s the matter , kid ? ” yossarian inquir compassion . “ i ’ m flat broke again , ” nate repli with a lame and distract smile . “ what am i go to do ? ” yossarian didn ’ t know . nate had spent the last thirty-two hour at twenti dollar an hour with the apathet whore he ador , and he had noth left of hi pay or of the lucr allow he receiv everi month from hi wealthi and gener father . that meant he could not spend time with her ani more . she would not allow him to walk besid her as she stroll the pavement solicit other servicemen , and she wa infuri when she spi him trail her from a distanc . he wa free to hang around her apart if he care to , but there wa no certainti that she would be there . and she would give him noth unless he could pay . she found sex uninterest . nate want the assur that she wa not go to bed with anyon unsavori or with someon he knew . captain black alway made it a point to buy her each time he came to rome , just so he could torment nate with the news that he had thrown hi sweetheart anoth hump and watch nate eat hi liver as he relat the atroci indign to which he had forc her to submit . luciana wa touch by nate ’ s forlorn air , but broke loudli into robust laughter again the moment she step outsid into the sunni street with yossarian and heard hungri joe beseech them from the window to come back and take their cloth off , becaus he realli wa a photograph from life magazin . luciana fled mirth along the sidewalk in her high white wedgi , pull yossarian along in tow with the same lusti and ingenu zeal she had display in the danc hall the night befor and at everi moment sinc . yossarian caught up and walk with hi arm around her waist until they came to the corner and she step away from him . she straighten her hair in a mirror from her pocketbook and put lipstick on . “ whi don ’ t you ask me to let you write my name and address on a piec of paper so that you will be abl to find me again when you come to rome ? ” she suggest . “ whi don ’ t you let me write your name and address down on a piec of paper ? ” he agre . “ whi ? ” she demand belliger , her mouth curl suddenli into a vehement sneer and her eye flash with anger . “ so you can tear it up into littl piec as soon as i leav ? ” “ who ’ s go to tear it up ? ” yossarian protest in confus . “ what the hell are you talk about ? ” “ you will , ” she insist . “ you ’ ll tear it up into littl piec the minut i ’ m gone and go walk away like a big shot becaus a tall , young , beauti girl like me , luciana , let you sleep with her and did not ask you for money. ” “ how much money are you ask me for ? ” he ask her . “ stupido ! ” she shout with emot . “ i am not ask you for ani money ! ” she stamp her foot and rais her arm in a turbul gestur that made yossarian fear she wa go to crack him in the face again with her great pocketbook . instead , she scribbl her name and address on a slip of paper and thrust it at him . “ here , ” she taunt him sardon , bite on her lip to still a delic tremor . “ don ’ t forget . don ’ t forget to tear it into tini piec as soon as i am gone. ” then she smile at him seren , squeez hi hand and , with a whisper regret “ addio , ” press herself against him for a moment and then straighten and walk away with unconsci digniti and grace . the minut she wa gone , yossarian tore the slip of paper up and walk away in the other direct , feel veri much like a big shot becaus a beauti young girl like luciana had slept with him and did not ask for money . he wa pretti pleas with himself until he look up in the dine room of the red cross build and found himself eat breakfast with dozen and dozen of other servicemen in all kind of fantast uniform , and then all at onc he wa surround by imag of luciana get out of her cloth and into her cloth and caress and harangu him tempestu in the pink rayon chemis she wore in bed with him and would not take off . yossarian choke on hi toast and egg at the enorm of hi error in tear her long , lith , nude , young vibrant limb into ani piec of paper so impud and dump her down so smugli into the gutter from the curb . he miss her terribl alreadi . there were so mani strident faceless peopl in uniform in the dine room with him . he felt an urgent desir to be alon with her again soon and sprang up impetu from hi tabl and went run outsid and back down the street toward the apart in search of the tini bit of paper in the gutter , but they had all been flush away by a street cleaner ’ s hose . he couldn ’ t find her again in the alli offic ’ night club that even or in the swelter , burnish , hedonist bedlam of the black-market restaur with it vast bob wooden tray of eleg food and it chirp flock of bright and love girl . he couldn ’ t even find the restaur . when he went to bed alon , he dodg flak over bologna again in a dream , with aarfi hang over hi shoulder abomin in the plane with a bloat sordid leer . in the morn he ran look for luciana in all the french offic he could find , but nobodi knew what he wa talk about , and then he ran in terror , so jumpi , distraught and disorgan that he just had to keep run in terror somewher , to the enlist men ’ s apart for the squat maid in the lime-color panti , whom he found dust in snowden ’ s room on the fifth floor in her drab brown sweater and heavi dark skirt . snowden wa still aliv then , and yossarian could tell it wa snowden ’ s room from the name stencil in white on the blue duffel bag he trip over as he plung through the doorway at her in a frenzi of creativ desper . the woman caught him by the wrist befor he could fall as he came stumbl toward her in need and pull him along down on top of her as she flop over backward onto the bed and envelop him hospit in her flaccid and consol embrac , her dust mop aloft in her hand like a banner as her broad , brutish congeni face gaze up at him fondli with a smile of unperjur friendship . there wa a sharp elast snap as she roll the lime-color panti off beneath them both without disturb him . he stuf money into her hand when they were finish . she hug him in gratitud . he hug her . she hug him back and then pull him down on top of her on the bed again . he stuf more money into her hand when they were finish thi time and ran out of the room befor she could begin hug him in gratitud again . back at hi own apart , he threw hi thing togeth as fast as he could , left for nate what money he had , and ran back to pianosa on a suppli plane to apolog to hungri joe for shut him out of the bedroom . the apolog wa unnecessari , for hungri joe wa in high spirit when yossarian found him . hungri joe wa grin from ear to ear , and yossarian turn sick at the sight of him , for he understood instantli what the high spirit meant . “ forti mission , ” hungri joe announc readili in a voic lyric with relief and elat . “ the colonel rais them again. ” yossarian wa stun . “ but i ’ ve got thirty-two , goddammit ! three more and i would have been through. ” hungri joe shrug indiffer . “ the colonel want forti mission , ” he repeat . yossarian shove him out of the way and ran right into the hospit . 17 the soldier in white yossarian ran right into the hospit , determin to remain there forev rather than fli one mission more than the thirty-two mission he had . ten day after he chang hi mind and came out , the colonel rais the mission to forty-f and yossarian ran right back in , determin to remain in the hospit forev rather than fli one mission more than the six mission more he had just flown . yossarian could run into the hospit whenev he want to becaus of hi liver and becaus of hi eye ; the doctor couldn ’ t fix hi liver condit and couldn ’ t meet hi eye each time he told them he had a liver condit . he could enjoy himself in the hospit , just as long as there wa no one realli veri sick in the same ward . hi system wa sturdi enough to surviv a case of someon els ’ s malaria or influenza with scarc ani discomfort at all . he could come through other peopl ’ s tonsillectomi without suffer ani postop distress , and even endur their hernia and hemorrhoid with onli mild nausea and revuls . but that wa just about as much as he could go through without get sick . after that he wa readi to bolt . he could relax in the hospit , sinc no one there expect him to do anyth . all he wa expect to do in the hospit wa die or get better , and sinc he wa perfectli all right to begin with , get better wa easi . be in the hospit wa better than be over bologna or fli over avignon with hupl and dobb at the control and snowden die in back . there were usual not nearli as mani sick peopl insid the hospit as yossarian saw outsid the hospit , and there were gener fewer peopl insid the hospit who were serious sick . there wa a much lower death rate insid the hospit than outsid the hospit , and a much healthier death rate . few peopl die unnecessarili . peopl knew a lot more about die insid the hospit and made a much neater , more orderli job of it . they couldn ’ t domin death insid the hospit , but they certainli made her behav . they had taught her manner . they couldn ’ t keep death out , but while she wa in she had to act like a ladi . peopl gave up the ghost with delicaci and tast insid the hospit . there wa none of that crude , ugli ostent about die that wa so common outsid the hospit . they did not blow up in mid-air like kraft or the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent , or freez to death in the blaze summertim the way snowden had frozen to death after spill hi secret to yossarian in the back of the plane . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden had whimper . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” yossarian had tri to comfort him . “ there , there. ” they didn ’ t take it on the lam weirdli insid a cloud the way cleving had done . they didn ’ t explod into blood and clot matter . they didn ’ t drown or get struck by lightn , mangl by machineri or crush in landslid . they didn ’ t get shot to death in hold-up , strangl to death in rape , stab to death in saloon , bludgeon to death with axe by parent or children or die summarili by some other act of god . nobodi choke to death . peopl bled to death like gentlemen in an oper room or expir without comment in an oxygen tent . there wa none of that tricki now-you-see-me-now-you-don ’ t busi so much in vogu outsid the hospit , none of that now-i-am-and-now-i-ain ’ t . there were no famin or flood . children didn ’ t suffoc in cradl or icebox or fall under truck . no one wa beaten to death . peopl didn ’ t stick their head into oven with the ga on , jump in front of subway train or come plummet like dead weight out of hotel window with a whoosh ! , acceler at the rate of sixteen feet per second to land with a hideou plop ! on the sidewalk and die disgustingli there in public like an alpaca sack full of hairi strawberri ice cream , bleed , pink toe awri . all thing consid , yossarian often prefer the hospit , even though it had it fault . the help tend to be offici , the rule , if heed , restrict , and the manag meddlesom . sinc sick peopl were apt to be present , he could not alway depend on a live young crowd in the same ward with him , and the entertain wa not alway good . he wa forc to admit that the hospit had alter steadili for the wors as the war continu and one move closer to the battlefront , the deterior in the qualiti of the guest becom most mark within the combat zone itself where the effect of boom wartim condit were apt to make themselv conspicu immedi . the peopl got sicker and sicker the deeper he move into combat , until final in the hospit that last time there had been the soldier in white , who could not have been ani sicker without be dead , and he soon wa . the soldier in white wa construct entir of gauz , plaster and a thermomet , and the thermomet wa mere an adorn left balanc in the empti dark hole in the bandag over hi mouth earli each morn and late each afternoon by nurs cramer and nurs duckett right up to the afternoon nurs cramer read the thermomet and discov he wa dead . now that yossarian look back , it seem that nurs cramer , rather than the talk texan , had murder the soldier in white ; if she had not read the thermomet and report what she had found , the soldier in white might still be lie there aliv exactli as he had been lie there all along , encas from head to toe in plaster and gauz with both strang , rigid leg elev from the hip and both strang arm strung up perpendicularli , all four bulki limb in cast , all four strang , useless limb hoist up in the air by taut wire cabl and fantast long lead weight suspend darkli abov him . ly there that way might not have been much of a life , but it wa all the life he had , and the decis to termin it , yossarian felt , should hardli have been nurs cramer ’ s . the soldier in white wa like an unrol bandag with a hole in it or like a broken block of stone in a harbor with a crook zinc pipe jut out . the other patient in the ward , all but the texan , shrank from him with a tenderheart avers from the moment they set eye on him the morn after the night he had been sneak in . they gather soberli in the farthest recess of the ward and gossip about him in malici , offend underton , rebel against hi presenc as a ghastli imposit and resent him malevol for the nauseat truth of which he wa bright remind . they share a common dread that he would begin moan . “ i don ’ t know what i ’ ll do if he doe begin moan , ” the dash young fighter pilot with the golden mustach had griev forlornli . “ it mean he ’ ll moan dure the night , too , becaus he won ’ t be abl to tell time. ” no sound at all came from the soldier in white all the time he wa there . the rag round hole over hi mouth wa deep and jet black and show no sign of lip , teeth , palat or tongu . the onli one who ever came close enough to look wa the affabl texan , who came close enough sever time a day to chat with him about more vote for the decent folk , open each convers with the same unvari greet : “ what do you say , fella ? how you come along ? ” the rest of the men avoid them both in their regul maroon corduroy bathrob and unravel flannel pajama , wonder gloomili who the soldier in white wa , whi he wa there and what he wa realli like insid . “ he ’ s all right , i tell you , ” the texan would report back to them encouragingli after each of hi social visit . “ deep down insid he ’ s realli a regular guy . he ’ s feel a littl shi and insecur now becaus he doesn ’ t know anybodi here and can ’ t talk . whi don ’ t you all just step right up to him and introduc yourselv ? he won ’ t hurt you. ” “ what the goddam hell are you talk about ? ” dunbar demand . “ doe he even know what you ’ re talk about ? ” “ sure he know what i ’ m talk about . he ’ s not stupid . there ain ’ t noth wrong with him. ” “ can he hear you ? ” “ well , i don ’ t know if he can hear me or not , but i ’ m sure he know what i ’ m talk about. ” “ doe that hole over hi mouth ever move ? ” “ now , what kind of a crazi question is that ? ” the texan ask uneasili . “ how can you tell if he ’ s breath if it never move ? ” “ how can you tell it ’ s a he ? ” “ doe he have pad over hi eye underneath that bandag over hi face ? ” “ doe he ever wiggl hi toe or move the tip of hi finger ? ” the texan back away in mount confus . “ now , what kind of a crazi question is that ? you fella must all be crazi or someth . whi don ’ t you just walk right up to him and get acquaint ? he ’ s a real nice guy , i tell you. ” the soldier in white wa more like a stuf and steril mummi than a real nice guy . nurs duckett and nurs cramer kept him spick-and-span . they brush hi bandag often with a whiskbroom and scrub the plaster cast on hi arm , leg , shoulder , chest and pelvi with soapi water . work with a round tin of metal polish , they wax a dim gloss on the dull zinc pipe rise from the cement on hi groin . with damp dish towel they wipe the dust sever time a day from the slim black rubber tube lead in and out of him to the two larg stopper jar , one of them , hang on a post besid hi bed , drip fluid into hi arm constantli through a slit in the bandag while the other , almost out of sight on the floor , drain the fluid away through the zinc pipe rise from hi groin . both young nurs polish the glass jar unceasingli . they were proud of their housework . the more solicit of the two wa nurs cramer , a shape , pretti , sexless girl with a wholesom unattract face . nurs cramer had a cute nose and a radiant , bloom complexion dot with fetch spray of ador freckl that yossarian detest . she wa touch veri deepli by the soldier in white . her virtuou , pale-blu , saucerlik eye flood with leviathan tear on unexpect occas and made yossarian mad . “ how the hell do you know he ’ s even in there ? ” he ask her . “ don ’ t you dare talk to me that way ! ” she repli indignantli . “ well , how do you ? you don ’ t even know if it ’ s realli him. ” “ who ? ” “ whoever ’ s suppos to be in all those bandag . you might realli be weep for somebodi els . how do you know he ’ s even aliv ? ” “ what a terribl thing to say ! ” nurs cramer exclaim . “ now , you get right into bed and stop make joke about him. ” “ i ’ m not make joke . anybodi might be in there . for all we know , it might even be mudd. ” “ what are you talk about ? ” nurs cramer plead with him in a quaver voic . “ mayb that ’ s where the dead man is. ” “ what dead man ? ” “ i ’ ve got a dead man in my tent that nobodi can throw out . hi name is mudd. ” nurs cramer ’ s face blanch and she turn to dunbar desper for aid . “ make him stop say thing like that , ” she beg . “ mayb there ’ s no one insid , ” dunbar suggest help . “ mayb they just sent the bandag here for a joke. ” she step away from dunbar in alarm . “ you ’ re crazi , ” she cri , glanc about imploringli . “ you ’ re both crazy. ” nurs duckett show up then and chase them all back to their own bed while nurs cramer chang the stopper jar for the soldier in white . chang the jar for the soldier in white wa no troubl at all , sinc the same clear fluid wa drip back insid him over and over again with no appar loss . when the jar feed the insid of hi elbow wa just about empti , the jar on the floor wa just about full , and the two were simpli uncoupl from their respect hose and revers quickli so that the liquid could be drip right back into him . chang the jar wa no troubl to anyon but the men who watch them chang everi hour or so and were baffl by the procedur . “ whi can ’ t they hook the two jar up to each other and elimin the middleman ? ” the artilleri captain with whom yossarian had stop play chess inquir . “ what the hell do they need him for ? ” “ i wonder what he did to deserv it , ” the warrant offic with malaria and a mosquito bite on hi ass lament after nurs cramer had read her thermomet and discov that the soldier in white wa dead . “ he went to war , ” the fighter pilot with the golden mustach surmis . “ we all went to war , ” dunbar counter . “ that ’ s what i mean , ” the warrant offic with malaria continu . “ whi him ? there just doesn ’ t seem to be ani logic to thi system of reward and punish . look what happen to me . if i had gotten syphili or a dose of clap for my five minut of passion on the beach instead of thi damn mosquito bite , i could see justic . but malaria ? malaria ? who can explain malaria as a consequ of fornic ? ” the warrant offic shook hi head in numb astonish . “ what about me ? ” yossarian said . “ i step out of my tent in marrakech one night to get a bar of candi and caught your dose of clap when that wac i never even saw befor hiss me into the bush . all i realli want wa a bar of candi , but who could turn it down ? ” “ that sound like my dose of clap , all right , ” the warrant offic agre . “ but i ’ ve still got somebodi els ’ s malaria . just for onc i ’ d like to see all these thing sort of straighten out , with each person get exactli what he deserv . it might give me some confid in thi universe. ” “ i ’ ve got somebodi els ’ s three hundr thousand dollar , ” the dash young fighter captain with the golden mustach admit . “ i ’ ve been goof off sinc the day i wa born . i cheat my way through prep school and colleg , and just about all i ’ ve been do ever sinc is shack up with pretti girl who think i ’ d make a good husband . i ’ ve got no ambit at all . the onli thing i want to do after the war is marri some girl who ’ s got more money than i have and shack up with lot more pretti girl . the three hundr thousand buck wa left to me befor i wa born by a grandfath who made a fortun sell on an intern scale . i know i don ’ t deserv it , but i ’ ll be damn if i give it back . i wonder who it realli belong to. ” “ mayb it belong to my father , ” dunbar conjectur . “ he spent a lifetim at hard work and never could make enough money to even send my sister and me through colleg . he ’ s dead now , so you might as well keep it. ” “ now , if we can just find out who my malaria belong to we ’ d be all set . it ’ s not that i ’ ve got anyth against malaria . i ’ d just as soon goldbrick with malaria as with anyth els . it ’ s onli that i feel an injustic ha been commit . whi should i have somebodi els ’ s malaria and you have my dose of clap ? ” “ i ’ ve got more than your dose of clap , ” yossarian told him . “ i ’ ve got to keep fli combat mission becaus of that dose of your until they kill me. ” “ that make it even wors . what ’ s the justic in that ? ” “ i had a friend name cleving two and a half week ago who use to see plenti of justic in it. ” “ it ’ s the highest kind of justic of all , ” cleving had gloat , clap hi hand with a merri laugh . “ i can ’ t help think of the hippolytu of euripid , where the earli licenti of theseu is probabl respons for the ascetic of the son that help bring about the tragedi that ruin them all . if noth els , that episod with the wac should teach you the evil of sexual immorality. ” “ it teach me the evil of candy. ” “ can ’ t you see that you ’ re not exactli without blame for the predica you ’ re in ? ” cleving had continu with undisguis relish . “ if you hadn ’ t been laid up in the hospit with vener diseas for ten day back there in africa , you might have finish your twenty-f mission in time to be sent home befor colonel never wa kill and colonel cathcart came to replac him. ” “ and what about you ? ” yossarian had repli . “ you never got clap in marrakech and you ’ re in the same predicament. ” “ i don ’ t know , ” confess cleving , with a trace of mock concern . “ i guess i must have done someth veri bad in my time. ” “ do you realli believ that ? ” cleving laugh . “ no , of cours not . i just like to kid you along a little. ” there were too mani danger for yossarian to keep track of . there wa hitler , mussolini and tojo , for exampl , and they were all out to kill him . there wa lieuten scheisskopf with hi fanatic for parad and there wa the bloat colonel with hi big fat mustach and hi fanatic for retribut , and they want to kill him , too . there wa applebi , havermey , black and korn . there wa nurs cramer and nurs duckett , who he wa almost certain want him dead , and there wa the texan and the c.i.d . man , about whom he had no doubt . there were bartend , bricklay and bu conductor all over the world who want him dead , landlord and tenant , traitor and patriot , lyncher , leech and lackey , and they were all out to bump him off . that wa the secret snowden had spill to him on the mission to avignon-they were out to get him ; and snowden had spill it all over the back of the plane . there were lymph gland that might do him in . there were kidney , nerv sheath and corpuscl . there were tumor of the brain . there wa hodgkin ’ s diseas , leukemia , amyotroph later sclerosi . there were fertil red meadow of epitheli tissu to catch and coddl a cancer cell . there were diseas of the skin , diseas of the bone , diseas of the lung , diseas of the stomach , diseas of the heart , blood and arteri . there were diseas of the head , diseas of the neck , diseas of the chest , diseas of the intestin , diseas of the crotch . there even were diseas of the feet . there were billion of conscienti bodi cell oxid away day and night like dumb anim at their complic job of keep him aliv and healthi , and everi one wa a potenti traitor and foe . there were so mani diseas that it took a truli diseas mind to even think about them as often as he and hungri joe did . hungri joe collect list of fatal diseas and arrang them in alphabet order so that he could put hi finger without delay on ani one he want to worri about . he grew veri upset whenev he misplac some or when he could not add to hi list , and he would go rush in a cold sweat to doc daneeka for help . “ give him ewe ’ s tumor , ” yossarian advis doc daneeka , who would come to yossarian for help in handl hungri joe , “ and follow it up with melanoma . hungri joe like linger diseas , but he like the fulmin one even more. ” doc daneeka had never heard of either . “ how do you manag to keep up on so mani diseas like that ? ” he inquir with high profession esteem . “ i learn about them at the hospit when i studi the reader ’ s digest. ” yossarian had so mani ailment to be afraid of that he wa sometim tempt to turn himself in to the hospit for good and spend the rest of hi life stretch out there insid an oxygen tent with a batteri of specialist and nurs seat at one side of hi bed twenty-four hour a day wait for someth to go wrong and at least one surgeon with a knife pois at the other , readi to jump forward and begin cut away the moment it becam necessari . aneur , for instanc ; how els could they ever defend him in time against an aneur of the aorta ? yossarian felt much safer insid the hospit than outsid the hospit , even though he loath the surgeon and hi knife as much as he had ever loath anyon . he could start scream insid a hospit and peopl would at least come run to tri to help ; outsid the hospit they would throw him in prison if he ever start scream about all the thing he felt everyon ought to start scream about , or they would put him in the hospit . one of the thing he want to start scream about wa the surgeon ’ s knife that wa almost certain to be wait for him and everyon els who live long enough to die . he wonder often how he would ever recogn the first chill , flush , twing , ach , belch , sneez , stain , lethargi , vocal slip , loss of balanc or laps of memori that would signal the inevit begin of the inevit end . he wa afraid also that doc daneeka would still refus to help him when he went to him again after jump out of major major ’ s offic , and he wa right . “ you think you ’ ve got someth to be afraid about ? ” doc daneeka demand , lift hi delic immacul dark head up from hi chest to gaze at yossarian irasc for a moment with lachrymos eye . “ what about me ? my preciou medic skill are rust away here on thi lousi island while other doctor are clean up . do you think i enjoy sit here day after day refus to help you ? i wouldn ’ t mind it so much if i could refus to help you back in the state or in some place like rome . but say no to you here isn ’ t easi for me , either. ” “ then stop say no . ground me. ” “ i can ’ t ground you , ” doc daneeka mumbl . “ how mani time do you have to be told ? ” “ ye you can . major major told me you ’ re the onli one in the squadron who can ground me. ” doc daneeka wa stun . “ major major told you that ? when ? ” “ when i tackl him in the ditch. ” “ major major told you that ? in a ditch ? ” “ he told me in hi offic after we left the ditch and jump insid . he told me not to tell anyon he told me , so don ’ t start shoot your mouth off. ” “ whi that dirti , scheme liar ! ” doc daneeka cri . “ he wasn ’ t suppos to tell anyon . did he tell you how i could ground you ? ” “ just by fill out a littl slip of paper say i ’ m on the verg of a nervou collaps and send it to group . dr. stubb ground men in hi squadron all the time , so whi can ’ t you ? ” “ and what happen to the men after stubb doe ground them ? ” doc daneeka retort with a sneer . “ they go right back on combat statu , don ’ t they ? and he find himself right up the creek . sure , i can ground you by fill out a slip say you ’ re unfit to fli . but there ’ s a catch. ” “ catch-22 ? ” “ sure . if i take you off combat duti , group ha to approv my action , and group isn ’ t go to . they ’ ll put you right back on combat statu , and then where will i be ? on my way to the pacif ocean , probabl . no , thank you . i ’ m not go to take ani chanc for you. ” “ isn ’ t it worth a tri ? ” yossarian argu . “ what ’ s so hot about pianosa ? ” “ pianosa is terribl . but it ’ s better than the pacif ocean . i wouldn ’ t mind be ship someplac civil where i might pick up a buck or two in abort money everi now and then . but all they ’ ve got in the pacif is jungl and monsoon , i ’ d rot there. ” “ you ’ re rot here. ” doc daneeka flare up angrili . “ yeah ? well , at least i ’ m go to come out of thi war aliv , which is a lot more than you ’ re go to do. ” “ that ’ s just what i ’ m tri to tell you , goddammit . i ’ m ask you to save my life. ” “ it ’ s not my busi to save live , ” doc daneeka retort sullenli . “ what is your busi ? ” “ i don ’ t know what my busi is . all they ever told me wa to uphold the ethic of my profess and never give testimoni against anoth physician . listen . you think you ’ re the onli one whose life is in danger ? what about me ? those two quack i ’ ve got work for me in the medic tent still can ’ t find out what ’ s wrong with me. ” “ mayb it ’ s ewe ’ s tumor , ” yossarian mutter sarcast . “ do you realli think so ? ” doc daneeka exclaim with fright . “ oh , i don ’ t know , ” yossarian answer impati . “ i just know i ’ m not go to fli ani more mission . they wouldn ’ t realli shoot me , would they ? i ’ ve got fifty-one. ” “ whi don ’ t you at least finish the fifty-f befor you take a stand ? ” doc daneeka advis . “ with all your bitch , you ’ ve never finish a tour of duti even once. ” “ how the hell can i ? the colonel keep rais them everi time i get close. ” “ you never finish your mission becaus you keep run into the hospit or go off to rome . you ’ d be in a much , stronger posit if you had your fifty-f finish and then refus to fli . then mayb i ’ d see what i could do. ” “ do you promis ? ” “ i promise. ” “ what do you promis ? ” “ i promis that mayb i ’ ll think about do someth to help if you finish your fifty-f mission and if you get mcwatt to put my name on hi flight log again so that i can draw my flight pay without go up in a plane . i ’ m afraid of airplan . did you read about that airplan crash in idaho three week ago ? six peopl kill . it wa terribl . i don ’ t know whi they want me to put in four hour ’ flight time everi month in order to get my flight pay . don ’ t i have enough to worri about without worri about be kill in an airplan crash too ? ” “ i worri about the airplan crash also , ” yossarian told him . “ you ’ re not the onli one. ” “ yeah , but i ’ m also pretti worri about that ewe ’ s tumor , ” doc daneeka boast . “ do you think that ’ s whi my nose is stuf all the time and whi i alway feel so chilli ? take my pulse. ” yossarian also worri about ewe ’ s tumor and melanoma . catastroph were lurk everywher , too numer to count . when he contempl the mani diseas and potenti accid threaten him , he wa posit astound that he had manag to surviv in good health for as long as he had . it wa miracul . each day he face wa anoth danger mission against mortal . and he had been surviv them for twenty-eight year . 18 the soldier who saw everyth twice yossarian owe hi good health to exercis , fresh air , teamwork and good sportsmanship ; it wa to get away from them all that he had first discov the hospit . when the physical-educ offic at loweri field order everyon to fall out for calisthen one afternoon , yossarian , the privat , report instead at the dispensari with what he said wa a pain in hi right side . “ beat it , ” said the doctor on duti there , who wa do a crossword puzzl . “ we can ’ t tell him to beat it , ” said a corpor . “ there ’ s a new direct out about abdomin complaint . we have to keep them under observ five day becaus so mani of them have been die after we make them beat it. ” “ all right , ” grumbl the doctor . “ keep him under observ five day and then make him beat it. ” they took yossarian ’ s cloth away and put him in a ward , where he wa veri happi when no one wa snore nearbi . in the morn a help young english intern pop in to ask him about hi liver . “ i think it ’ s my appendix that ’ s bother me , ” yossarian told him . “ your appendix is no good , ” the englishman declar with jaunti author . “ if your appendix goe wrong , we can take it out and have you back on activ duti in almost no time at all . but come to us with a liver complaint and you can fool us for week . the liver , you see , is a larg , ugli mysteri to us . if you ’ ve ever eaten liver you know what i mean . we ’ re pretti sure today that the liver exist and we have a fairli good idea of what it doe whenev it ’ s do what it ’ s suppos to be do . beyond that , we ’ re realli in the dark . after all , what is a liver ? my father , for exampl , die of cancer of the liver and wa never sick a day of hi life right up till the moment it kill him . never felt a twing of pain . in a way , that wa too bad , sinc i hate my father . lust for my mother , you know. ” “ what ’ s an english medic offic do on duti here ? ” yossarian want to know . the offic laugh . “ i ’ ll tell you all about that when i see you tomorrow morn . and throw that silli ice bag away befor you die of pneumonia. ” yossarian never saw him again . that wa one of the nice thing about all the doctor at the hospit ; he never saw ani of them a second time . they came and went and simpli disappear . in place of the english intern the next day , there arriv a group of doctor he had never seen befor to ask him about hi appendix . “ there ’ s noth wrong with my appendix , ” yossarian inform them . “ the doctor yesterday said it wa my liver. ” “ mayb it is hi liver , ” repli the white-hair offic in charg . “ what doe hi blood count show ? ” “ he hasn ’ t had a blood count. ” “ have one taken right away . we can ’ t afford to take chanc with a patient in hi condit . we ’ ve got to keep ourselv cover in case he dies. ” he made a notat on hi clipboard and spoke to yossarian . “ in the meantim , keep that ice bag on . it ’ s veri important. ” “ i don ’ t have an ice bag on. ” “ well , get one . there must be an ice bag around here somewher . and let someon know if the pain becom unendurable. ” at the end of ten day , a new group of doctor came to yossarian with bad news ; he wa in perfect health and had to get out . he wa rescu in the nick of time by a patient across the aisl who began to see everyth twice . without warn , the patient sat up in bed and shout . “ i see everyth twice ! ” a nurs scream and an orderli faint . doctor came run up from everi direct with needl , light , tube , rubber mallet and oscil metal tine . they roll up complic instrument on wheel . there wa not enough of the patient to go around , and specialist push forward in line with raw temper and snap at their colleagu in front to hurri up and give somebodi els a chanc . a colonel with a larg forehead and horn-rim glass soon arriv at a diagnosi . “ it ’ s mening , ” he call out emphat , wave the other back . “ although lord know there ’ s not the slightest reason for think so. ” “ then whi pick mening ? ” inquir a major with a suav chuckl . “ whi not , let ’ s say , acut nephriti ? ” “ becaus i ’ m a mening man , that ’ s whi , and not an acute-nephr man , ” retort the colonel . “ and i ’ m not go to give him up to ani of you kidney bird without a struggl . i wa here first. ” in the end , the doctor were all in accord . they agre they had no idea what wa wrong with the soldier who saw everyth twice , and they roll him away into a room in the corridor and quarantin everyon els in the ward for fourteen day . thanksgiv day came and went without ani fuss while yossarian wa still in the hospit . the onli bad thing about it wa the turkey for dinner , and even that wa pretti good . it wa the most ration thanksgiv he had ever spent , and he took a sacr oath to spend everi futur thanksgiv day in the cloister shelter of a hospit . he broke hi sacr oath the veri next year , when he spent the holiday in a hotel room instead in intellectu convers with lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife , who had dori duz ’ s dog tag on for the occas and who henpeck yossarian sententi for be cynic and callou about thanksgiv , even though she didn ’ t believ in god just as much as he didn ’ t . “ i ’ m probabl just as good an atheist as you are , ” she specul boast . “ but even i feel that we all have a great deal to be thank for and that we shouldn ’ t be asham to show it. ” “ name one thing i ’ ve got to be thank for , ” yossarian challeng her without interest . “ well… ” lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife muse and paus a moment to ponder dubious . “ me. ” “ oh , come on , ” he scof . she arch her eyebrow in surpris . “ aren ’ t you thank for me ? ” she ask . she frown peevishli , her pride wound . “ i don ’ t have to shack up with you , you know , ” she told him with cold digniti . “ my husband ha a whole squadron full of aviat cadet who would be onli too happi to shack up with their command offic ’ s wife just for the ad fillip it would give them. ” yossarian decid to chang the subject . “ now you ’ re chang the subject , ” he point out diplomat . “ i ’ ll bet i can name two thing to be miser about for everi one you can name to be thank for. ” “ be thank you ’ ve got me , ” she insist . “ i am , honey . but i ’ m also goddam good and miser that i can ’ t have dori duz again , too . or the hundr of other girl and women i ’ ll see and want in my short lifetim and won ’ t be abl to go to bed with even once. ” “ be thank you ’ re healthy. ” “ be bitter you ’ re not go to stay that way. ” “ be glad you ’ re even alive. ” “ be furiou you ’ re go to die. ” “ thing could be much wors , ” she cri . “ they could be one hell of a lot better , ” he answer heatedli . “ you ’ re name onli one thing , ” she protest . “ you said you could name two. ” “ and don ’ t tell me god work in mysteri way , ” yossarian continu , hurtl on over her object . “ there ’ s noth so mysteri about it . he ’ s not work at all . he ’ s play . or els he ’ s forgotten all about us . that ’ s the kind of god you peopl talk about-a countri bumpkin , a clumsi , bungl , brainless , conceit , uncouth hayse . good god , how much rever can you have for a suprem be who find it necessari to includ such phenomena as phlegm and tooth decay in hi divin system of creation ? what in the world wa run through that warp , evil , scatolog mind of hi when he rob old peopl of the power to control their bowel movement ? whi in the world did he ever creat pain ? ” “ pain ? ” lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife pounc upon the word victori . “ pain is a use symptom . pain is a warn to us of bodili dangers. ” “ and who creat the danger ? ” yossarian demand . he laugh caustic . “ oh , he wa realli be charit to us when he gave us pain ! whi couldn ’ t he have use a doorbel instead to notifi us , or one of hi celesti choir ? or a system of blue-and-r neon tube right in the middl of each person ’ s forehead . ani jukebox manufactur worth hi salt could have done that . whi couldn ’ t he ? ” “ peopl would certainli look silli walk around with red neon tube in the middl of their foreheads. ” “ they certainli look beauti now writh in agoni or stupefi with morphin , don ’ t they ? what a coloss , immort blunder ! when you consid the opportun and power he had to realli do a job , and then look at the stupid , ugli littl mess he made of it instead , hi sheer incompet is almost stagger . it ’ s obviou he never met a payrol . whi , no self-respect businessman would hire a bungler like him as even a ship clerk ! ” lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife had turn ashen in disbelief and wa ogl him with alarm . “ you ’ d better not talk that way about him , honey , ” she warn him reprovingli in a low and hostil voic . “ he might punish you. ” “ isn ’ t he punish me enough ? ” yossarian snort resent . “ you know , we mustn ’ t let him get away with it . oh , no , we certainli mustn ’ t let him get away scot free for all the sorrow he ’ s caus us . someday i ’ m go to make him pay . i know when . on the judgment day . ye , that ’ s the day i ’ ll be close enough to reach out and grab that littl yokel by hi neck and- “ “ stop it ! stop it ! ” lieuten scheisskopf ’ s wife scream suddenli , and began beat him ineffectu about the head with both fist . “ stop it ! ” yossarian duck behind hi arm for protect while she slam away at him in feminin furi for a few second , and then he caught her determinedli by the wrist and forc her gentli back down on the bed . “ what the hell are you get so upset about ? ” he ask her bewilderedli in a tone of contrit amus . “ i thought you didn ’ t believ in god. ” “ i don ’ t , ” she sob , burst violent into tear . “ but the god i don ’ t believ in is a good god , a just god , a merci god . he ’ s not the mean and stupid god you make him out to be. ” yossarian laugh and turn her arm loos . “ let ’ s have a littl more religi freedom between us , ” he propos obligingli . “ you don ’ t believ in the god you want to , and i won ’ t believ in the god i want to . is that a deal ? ” that wa the most illog thanksgiv he could ever rememb spend , and hi thought return wish to hi halcyon fourteen-day quarantin in the hospit the year befor ; but even that idyl had end on a tragic note ; he wa still in good health when the quarantin period wa over , and they told him again that he had to get out and go to war . yossarian sat up in bed when he heard the bad news and shout . “ i see everyth twice ! ” pandemonium broke loos in the ward again . the specialist came run up from all direct and ring him in a circl of scrutini so confin that he could feel the humid breath from their variou nose blow uncomfort upon the differ sector of hi bodi . they went snoop into hi eye and ear with tini beam of light , assault hi leg and feet with rubber hammer and vibrat fork , drew blood from hi vein , held anyth handi up for him to see on the peripheri of hi vision . the leader of thi team of doctor wa a dignifi , solicit gentleman who held one finger up directli in front of yossarian and demand , “ how mani finger do you see ? ” “ two , ” said yossarian . “ how mani finger do you see now ? ” ask the doctor , hold up two . “ two , ” said yossarian . “ and how mani now ? ” ask the doctor , hold up none . “ two , ” said yossarian . the doctor ’ s face wreath with a smile . “ by jove , he ’ s right , ” he declar jubilantli . “ he doe see everyth twice. ” they roll yossarian away on a stretcher into the room with the other soldier who saw everyth twice and quarantin everyon els in the ward for anoth fourteen day . “ i see everyth twice ! ” the soldier who saw everyth twice shout when they roll yossarian in . “ i see everyth twice ! ” yossarian shout back at him just as loudli , with a secret wink . “ the wall ! the wall ! ” the other soldier cri . “ move back the wall ! ” “ the wall ! the wall ! ” yossarian cri . “ move back the wall ! ” one of the doctor pretend to shove the wall back . “ is that far enough ? ” the soldier who saw everyth twice nod weakli and sank back on hi bed . yossarian nod weakli too , eye hi talent roommat with great humil and admir . he knew he wa in the presenc of a master . hi talent roommat wa obvious a person to be studi and emul . dure the night , hi talent roommat die , and yossarian decid that he had follow him far enough . “ i see everyth onc ! ” he cri quickli . a new group of specialist came pound up to hi bedsid with their instrument to find out if it wa true . “ how mani finger do you see ? ” ask the leader , hold up one . “ one. ” the doctor held up two finger . “ how mani finger do you see now ? ” “ one. ” the doctor held up ten finger . “ and how mani now ? ” “ one. ” the doctor turn to the other doctor with amaz . “ he doe see everyth onc ! ” he exclaim . “ we made him all better. ” “ and just in time , too , ” announc the doctor with whom yossarian next found himself alon , a tall , torpedo-shap congeni man with an unshaven growth of brown beard and a pack of cigarett in hi shirt pocket that he chain-smok insouciantli as he lean against the wall . “ there are some rel here to see you . oh , don ’ t worri , ” he ad with a laugh . “ not your rel . it ’ s the mother , father and brother of that chap who die . they ’ ve travel all the way from new york to see a die soldier , and you ’ re the handiest one we ’ ve got. ” “ what are you talk about ? ” yossarian ask suspici . “ i ’ m not dying. ” “ of cours you ’ re die . we ’ re all die . where the devil els do you think you ’ re head ? ” “ they didn ’ t come to see me , ” yossarian object . “ they came to see their son. ” “ they ’ ll have to take what they can get . as far as we ’ re concern , one die boy is just as good as ani other , or just as bad . to a scientist , all die boy are equal . i have a proposit for you . you let them come in and look you over for a few minut and i won ’ t tell anyon you ’ ve been lie about your liver symptoms. ” yossarian drew back from him farther . “ you know about that ? ” “ of cours i do . give us some credit. ” the doctor chuckl amiabl and lit anoth cigarett . “ how do you expect anyon to believ you have a liver condit if you keep squeez the nurs ’ tit everi time you get a chanc ? you ’ re go to have to give up sex if you want to convinc peopl you ’ ve got an ail liver. ” “ that ’ s a hell of a price to pay just to keep aliv . whi didn ’ t you turn me in if you knew i wa fake ? ” “ whi the devil should i ? ” ask the doctor with a flicker of surpris . “ we ’ re all in thi busi of illus togeth . i ’ m alway will to lend a help hand to a fellow conspir along the road to surviv if he ’ s will to do the same for me . these peopl have come a long way , and i ’ d rather not disappoint them . i ’ m sentiment about old people. ” “ but they came to see their son. ” “ they came too late . mayb they won ’ t even notic the difference. ” “ suppos they start crying. ” “ they probabl will start cri . that ’ s one of the reason they came . i ’ ll listen outsid the door and break it up if it start get tacky. ” “ it all sound a bit crazi , ” yossarian reflect . “ what do they want to watch their son die for , anyway ? ” “ i ’ ve never been abl to figur that one out , ” the doctor admit , “ but they alway do . well , what do you say ? all you ’ ve got to do is lie there a few minut and die a littl . is that ask so much ? ” “ all right , ” yossarian gave in . “ if it ’ s just for a few minut and you promis to wait right outside. ” he warm to hi role . “ say , whi don ’ t you wrap a bandag around me for effect ? ” “ that sound like a splendid idea , ” applaud the doctor . they wrap a batch of bandag around yossarian . a team of medic orderli instal tan shade on each of the two window and lower them to dous the room in depress shadow . yossarian suggest flower and the doctor sent an orderli out to find two small bunch of fade one with a strong and sicken smell . when everyth wa in place , they made yossarian get back into bed and lie down . then they admit the visitor . the visitor enter uncertainli as though they felt they were intrud , tipto in with stare of meek apolog , first the griev mother and father , then the brother , a glower heavy-set sailor with a deep chest . the man and woman step into the room stifi side by side as though right out of a familiar , though esoter , anniversari daguerreotyp on a wall . they were both short , sere and proud . they seem made of iron and old , dark cloth . the woman had a long , brood oval face of burnt umber , with coars gray black hair part sever in the middl and comb back auster behind her neck without curl , wave or ornament . her mouth wa sullen and sad , her line lip compress . the father stood veri rigid and quaint in a double-breast suit with pad shoulder that were much too tight for him . he wa broad and muscular on a small scale and had a magnific curl silver mustach on hi crinkl face . hi eye were creas and rheumi , and he appear tragic ill at eas as he stood awkwardli with the brim of hi black felt fedora held in hi two brawni labor ’ s hand out in front of hi wide lapel . poverti and hard work had inflict iniquit damag on both . the brother wa look for a fight . hi round white cap wa cock at an insol tilt , hi hand were clench , and he glare at everyth in the room with a scowl of injur trucul . the three creak forward timidli , hold themselv close to each other in a stealthi , funer group and inch forward almost in step , until they arriv at the side of the bed and stood stare down at yossarian . there wa a gruesom and excruci silenc that threaten to endur forev . final yossarian wa unabl to bear it ani longer and clear hi throat . the old man spoke at last . “ he look terribl , ” he said . “ he ’ s sick , pa. ” “ giusepp , ” said the mother , who had seat herself in a chair with her veinou finger clasp in her lap . “ my name is yossarian , ” yossarian said . “ hi name is yossarian , ma . yossarian , don ’ t you recogn me ? i ’ m your brother john . don ’ t you know who i am ? ” “ sure i do . you ’ re my brother john. ” “ he doe recogn me ! pa , he know who i am . yossarian , here ’ s papa . say hello to papa. ” “ hello , papa , ” said yossarian . “ hello , giuseppe. ” “ hi name is yossarian , pa. ” “ i can ’ t get over how terribl he look , ” the father said . “ he ’ s veri sick , pa . the doctor say he ’ s go to die. ” “ i didn ’ t know whether to believ the doctor or not , ” the father said . “ you know how crook those guy are. ” “ giusepp , ” the mother said again , in a soft , broken chord of mute anguish . “ hi name is yossarian , ma . she don ’ t rememb thing too good ani more . how ’ re they treat you in here , kid ? they treat you pretti good ? ” “ pretti good , ” yossarian told him . “ that ’ s good . just don ’ t let anybodi in here push you around . you ’ re just as good as anybodi els in here even though you are italian . you ’ ve got right , too. ” yossarian winc and close hi eye so that he would not have to look at hi brother john . he began to feel sick . “ now see how terribl he look , ” the father observ . “ giusepp , ” the mother said . “ ma , hi name is yossarian , ” the brother interrupt her impati . “ can ’ t you rememb ? ” “ it ’ s all right , ” yossarian interrupt him . “ she can call me giusepp if she want to. ” “ giusepp , ” she said to him . “ don ’ t worri , yossarian , ” the brother said . “ everyth is go to be all right. ” “ don ’ t worri , ma , ” yossarian said . “ everyth is go to be all right. ” “ did you have a priest ? ” the brother want to know . “ ye , ” yossarian lie , winc again . “ that ’ s good , ” the brother decid . “ just as long as you ’ re get everyth you ’ ve got come to you . we came all the way from new york . we were afraid we wouldn ’ t get here in time. ” “ in time for what ? ” “ in time to see you befor you died. ” “ what differ would it make ? ” “ we didn ’ t want you to die by yourself. ” “ what differ would it make ? ” “ he must be get deliri , ” the brother said . “ he keep say the same thing over and over again. ” “ that ’ s realli veri funni , ” the old man repli . “ all the time i thought hi name wa giusepp , and now i find out hi name is yossarian . that ’ s realli veri funny. ” “ ma , make him feel good , ” the brother urg . “ say someth to cheer him up. ” “ giuseppe. ” “ it ’ s not giusepp , ma . it ’ s yossarian. ” “ what differ doe it make ? ” the mother answer in the same mourn tone , without look up . “ he ’ s dying. ” her tumid eye fill with tear and she began to cri , rock back and forth slowli in her chair with her hand lie in her lap like fallen moth . yossarian wa afraid she would start wail . the father and brother began cri also . yossarian rememb suddenli whi they were all cri , and he began cri too . a doctor yossarian had never seen befor step insid the room and told the visitor courteous that they had to go . the father drew himself up formal to say goodby . “ giusepp , ” he began . “ yossarian , ” correct the son . “ yossarian , ” said the father . “ giusepp , ” correct yossarian . “ soon you ’ re go to die. ” yossarian began to cri again . the doctor threw him a dirti look from the rear of the room , and yossarian made himself stop . the father continu solemnli with hi head lower . “ when you talk to the man upstair , ” he said , “ i want you to tell him someth for me . tell him it ain ’ t right for peopl to die when they ’ re young . i mean it . tell him if they got to die at all , they got to die when they ’ re old . i want you to tell him that . i don ’ t think he know it ain ’ t right , becaus he ’ s suppos to be good and it ’ s been go on for a long , long time . okay ? ” “ and don ’ t let anybodi up there push you around , ” the brother advis . “ you ’ ll be just as good as anybodi els in heaven , even though you are italian. ” “ dress warm , ” said the mother , who seem to know . 19 colonel cathcart colonel cathcart wa a slick , success , slipshod , unhappi man of thirty-six who lumber when he walk and want to be a gener . he wa dash and deject , pois and chagrin . he wa complac and insecur , dare in the administr stratagem he employ to bring himself to the attent of hi superior and craven in hi concern that hi scheme might all backfir . he wa handsom and unattract , a swashbuckl , beefi , conceit man who wa put on fat and wa torment chronic by prolong seizur of apprehens . colonel cathcart wa conceit becaus he wa a full colonel with a combat command at the age of onli thirty-six ; and colonel cathcart wa deject becaus although he wa alreadi thirty-six he wa still onli a full colonel . colonel cathcart wa impervi to absolut . he could measur hi own progress onli in relationship to other , and hi idea of excel wa to do someth at least as well as all the men hi own age who were do the same thing even better . the fact that there were thousand of men hi own age and older who had not even attain the rank of major enliven him with foppish delight in hi own remark worth ; on the other hand , the fact that there were men of hi own age and younger who were alreadi gener contamin him with an agon sens of failur and made him gnaw at hi fingernail with an unappeas anxieti that wa even more intens than hungri joe ’ s . colonel cathcart wa a veri larg , pout , broadshould man with close-crop curli dark hair that wa gray at the tip and an ornat cigarett holder that he purchas the day befor he arriv in pianosa to take command of hi group . he display the cigarett holder grandli on everi occas and had learn to manipul it adroitli . unwittingli , he had discov deep within himself a fertil aptitud for smoke with a cigarett holder . as far as he could tell , hi wa the onli cigarett holder in the whole mediterranean theater of oper , and the thought wa both flatter and disquiet . he had no doubt at all that someon as debonair and intellectu as gener peckem approv of hi smoke with a cigarett holder , even though the two were in each other ’ s presenc rather seldom , which in a way wa veri lucki , colonel cathcart recogn with relief , sinc gener peckem might not have approv of hi cigarett holder at all . when such misgiv assail colonel cathcart , he choke back a sob and want to throw the damn thing away , but he wa restrain by hi unswerv convict that the cigarett holder never fail to embellish hi masculin , martial physiqu with a high gloss of sophist heroism that illumin him to dazzl advantag among all the other full colonel in the american armi with whom he wa in competit . although how could he be sure ? colonel cathcart wa indefatig that way , an industri , intens , dedic militari tactician who calcul day and night in the servic of himself . he wa hi own sarcophagu , a bold and infal diplomat who wa alway berat himself disgustedli for all the chanc he had miss and kick himself regret for all the error he had made . he wa tens , irrit , bitter and smug . he wa a valor opportunist who pounc hoggishli upon everi opportun colonel korn discov for him and trembl in damp despair immedi afterward at the possibl consequ he might suffer . he collect rumor greedili and treasur gossip . he believ all the news he heard and had faith in none . he wa on the alert constantli for everi signal , shrewdli sensit to relationship and situat that did not exist . he wa someon in the know who wa alway strive pathet to find out what wa go on . he wa a bluster , intrepid bulli who brood inconsol over the terribl ineradic impress he knew he kept make on peopl of promin who were scarc awar that he wa even aliv . everybodi wa persecut him . colonel cathcart live by hi wit in an unstabl , arithmet world of black eye and feather in hi cap , of overwhelm imaginari triumph and catastroph imaginari defeat . he oscil hourli between anguish and exhilar , multipli fantast the grandeur of hi victori and exagger tragic the serious of hi defeat . nobodi ever caught him nap . if word reach him that gener dreedl or gener peckem had been seen smile , frown , or do neither , he could not make himself rest until he had found an accept interpret and grumbl mulishli until colonel korn persuad him to relax and take thing easi . lieuten colonel korn wa a loyal , indispens alli who got on colonel cathcart ’ s nerv . colonel cathcart pledg etern gratitud to colonel korn for the ingeni move he devis and wa furiou with him afterward when he realiz they might not work . colonel cathcart wa greatli indebt to colonel korn and did not like him at all . the two were veri close . colonel cathcart wa jealou of colonel korn ’ s intellig and had to remind himself often that colonel korn wa still onli a lieuten colonel , even though he wa almost ten year older than colonel cathcart , and that colonel korn had obtain hi educ at a state univers . colonel cathcart bewail the miser fate that had given him for an invalu assist someon as common as colonel korn . it wa degrad to have to depend so thoroughli on a person who had been educ at a state univers . if someon did have to becom indispens to him , colonel cathcart lament , it could just as easili have been someon wealthi and well groom , someon from a better famili who wa more matur than colonel korn and who did not treat colonel cathcart ’ s desir to becom a gener as frivol as colonel cathcart secretli suspect colonel korn secretli did . colonel cathcart want to be a gener so desper he wa will to tri anyth , even religion , and he summon the chaplain to hi offic late one morn the week after he had rais the number of mission to sixti and point abruptli down toward hi desk to hi copi of the saturday even post . the colonel wore hi khaki shirt collar wide open , expos a shadow of tough black bristl of beard on hi egg-whit neck , and had a spongi hang underlip . he wa a person who never tan , and he kept out of the sun as much as possibl to avoid burn . the colonel wa more than a head taller than the chaplain and over twice as broad , and hi swollen , overbear author made the chaplain feel frail and sickli by contrast . “ take a look , chaplain , ” colonel cathcart direct , screw a cigarett into hi holder and seat himself affluent in the swivel chair behind hi desk . “ let me know what you think. ” the chaplain look down at the open magazin compliantli and saw an editori spread deal with an american bomber group in england whose chaplain said prayer in the brief room befor each mission . the chaplain almost wept with happi when he realiz the colonel wa not go to holler at him . the two had hardli spoken sinc the tumultu even colonel cathcart had thrown him out of the offic ’ club at gener dreedl ’ s bid after chief white halfoat had punch colonel moodu in the nose . the chaplain ’ s initi fear had been that the colonel intend reprimand him for have gone back into the offic ’ club without permiss the even befor . he had gone there with yossarian and dunbar after the two had come unexpectedli to hi tent in the clear in the wood to ask him to join them . intimid as he wa by colonel cathcart , he nevertheless found it easier to brave hi displeasur than to declin the thought invit of hi two new friend , whom he had met on one of hi hospit visit just a few week befor and who had work so effect to insul him against the myriad social vicissitud involv in hi offici duti to live on closest term of familiar with more than nine hundr unfamiliar offic and enlist men who thought him an odd duck . the chaplain glu hi eye to the page of the magazin . he studi each photograph twice and read the caption intent as he organ hi respons to the colonel ’ s question into a grammat complet sentenc that he rehears and reorgan in hi mind a consider number of time befor he wa abl final to muster the courag to repli . “ i think that say prayer befor each mission is a veri moral and highli laudatori procedur , sir , ” he offer timidli , and wait . “ yeah , ” said the colonel . “ but i want to know if you think they ’ ll work here. ” “ ye , sir , ” answer the chaplain after a few moment . “ i should think they would. ” “ then i ’ d like to give it a try. ” the colonel ’ s ponder , farinac cheek were tint suddenli with glow patch of enthusiasm . he rose to hi feet and began walk around excitedli . “ look how much good they ’ ve done for these peopl in england . here ’ s a pictur of a colonel in the saturday even post whose chaplain conduct prayer befor each mission . if the prayer work for him , they should work for us . mayb if we say prayer , they ’ ll put my pictur in the saturday even post. ” the colonel sat down again and smile distantli in lavish contempl . the chaplain had no hint of what he wa expect to say next . with a pensiv express on hi oblong , rather pale face , he allow hi gaze to settl on sever of the high bushel fill with red plum tomato that stood in row against each of the wall . he pretend to concentr on a repli . after a while he realiz that he wa stare at row and row of bushel of red plum tomato and grew so intrigu by the question of what bushel brim with red plum tomato were do in a group command ’ s offic that he forgot complet about the discuss of prayer meet until colonel cathcart , in a genial digress , inquir : “ would you like to buy some , chaplain ? they come right off the farm colonel korn and i have up in the hill . i can let you have a bushel wholesale. ” “ oh , no , sir . i don ’ t think so. ” “ that ’ s quit all right , ” the colonel assur him liber . “ you don ’ t have to . milo is glad to snap up all we can produc . these were pick onli yesterday . notic how firm and ripe they are , like a young girl ’ s breasts. ” the chaplain blush , and the colonel understood at onc that he had made a mistak . he lower hi head in shame , hi cumbersom face burn . hi finger felt gross and unwieldi . he hate the chaplain venom for be a chaplain and make a coars blunder out of an observ that in ani other circumst , he knew , would have been consid witti and urban . he tri miser to recal some mean of extric them both from their devast embarrass . he recal instead that the chaplain wa onli a captain , and he straighten at onc with a shock and outrag gasp . hi cheek grew tight with furi at the thought that he had just been dupe into humili by a man who wa almost the same age as he wa and still onli a captain , and he swung upon the chaplain avengingli with a look of such murder antagon that the chaplain began to trembl . the colonel punish him sadist with a long , glower , malign , hate , silent stare . “ we were speak about someth els , ” he remind the chaplain cuttingli at last . “ we were not speak about the firm , ripe breast of beauti young girl but about someth els entir . we were speak about conduct religi servic in the brief room befor each mission . is there ani reason whi we can ’ t ? ” “ no , sir , ” the chaplain mumbl . “ then we ’ ll begin with thi afternoon ’ s mission. ” the colonel ’ s hostil soften gradual as he appli himself to detail . “ now , i want you to give a lot of thought to the kind of prayer we ’ re go to say . i don ’ t want anyth heavi or sad . i ’ d like you to keep it light and snappi , someth that will send the boy out feel pretti good . do you know what i mean ? i don ’ t want ani of thi kingdom of god or valley of death stuff . that ’ s all too neg . what are you make such a sour face for ? ” “ i ’ m sorri , sir , ” the chaplain stammer . “ i happen to be think of the twenty-third psalm just as you said that. ” “ how doe that one go ? ” “ that ’ s the one you were just refer to , sir . ‘ the lord is my shepherd ; i- ‘ ” “ that ’ s the one i wa just refer to . it ’ s out . what els have you got ? ” “ ’ save me , o god ; for the water are come in unto- ‘ ” “ no water , ” the colonel decid , blow ruggedli into hi cigarett holder after flip the butt down into hi combed-brass ash tray . “ whi don ’ t we tri someth music ? how about the harp on the willow ? ” “ that ha the river of babylon in it , sir , ” the chaplain repli . “ ’ …there we sat down , yea , we wept , when we rememb zion. ’ ” “ zion ? let ’ s forget about that one right now . i ’ d like to know how that one even got in there . haven ’ t you got anyth humor that stay away from water and valley and god ? i ’ d like to keep away from the subject of religion altogeth if we can. ” the chaplain wa apologet . “ i ’ m sorri , sir , but just about all the prayer i know are rather somber in tone and make at least some pass refer to god. ” “ then let ’ s get some new one . the men are alreadi do enough bitch about the mission i send them on without our rub it in with ani sermon about god or death or paradis . whi can ’ t we take a more posit approach ? whi can ’ t we all pray for someth good , like a tighter bomb pattern , for exampl ? couldn ’ t we pray for a tighter bomb pattern ? ” “ well , ye , sir , i suppos so , ” the chaplain answer hesitantli . “ you wouldn ’ t even need me if that ’ s all you want to do . you could do that yourself. ” “ i know i could , ” the colonel respond tartli . “ but what do you think you ’ re here for ? i could shop for my own food , too , but that ’ s milo ’ s job , and that ’ s whi he ’ s do it for everi group in the area . your job is to lead us in prayer , and from now on you ’ re go to lead us in a prayer for a tighter bomb pattern befor everi mission . is that clear ? i think a tighter bomb pattern is someth realli worth pray for . it will be a feather in all our cap with gener peckem . gener peckem feel it make a much nicer aerial photograph when the bomb explod close together. ” “ gener peckem , sir ? ” “ that ’ s right , chaplain , ” the colonel repli , chuckl patern at the chaplain ’ s look of puzzlement . “ i wouldn ’ t want thi to get around , but it look like gener dreedl is final on the way out and that gener peckem is slate to replac him . frankli , i ’ m not go to be sorri to see that happen . gener peckem is a veri good man , and i think we ’ ll all be much better off under him . on the other hand , it might never take place , and we ’ d still remain under gener dreedl . frankli , i wouldn ’ t be sorri to see that happen either , becaus gener dreedl is anoth veri good man , and i think we ’ ll all be much better off under him too . i hope you ’ re go to keep all thi under your hat , chaplain . i wouldn ’ t want either one to get the idea i wa throw my support on the side of the other. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ that ’ s good , ” the colonel exclaim , and stood up jovial . “ but all thi gossip isn ’ t get us into the saturday even post , eh , chaplain ? let ’ s see what kind of procedur we can evolv . incident , chaplain , not a word about thi beforehand to colonel korn . understand ? ” “ ye , sir. ” colonel cathcart began tramp back and forth reflect in the narrow corridor left between hi bushel of plum tomato and the desk and wooden chair in the center of the room . “ i suppos we ’ ll have to keep you wait outsid until the brief is over , becaus all that inform is classifi . we can slip you in while major danbi is synchron the watch . i don ’ t think there ’ s anyth secret about the right time . we ’ ll alloc about a minut and a half for you in the schedul . will a minut and a half be enough ? ” “ ye , sir . if it doesn ’ t includ the time necessari to excus the atheist from the room and admit the enlist men. ” colonel cathcart stop in hi track . “ what atheist ? ” he bellow defens , hi whole manner chang in a flash to one of virtuou and belliger denial . “ there are no atheist in my outfit ! atheism is against the law , isn ’ t it ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ it isn ’ t ? ” the colonel wa surpris . “ then it ’ s un-american , isn ’ t it ? ” “ i ’ m not sure , sir , ” answer the chaplain . “ well , i am ! ” the colonel declar . “ i ’ m not go to disrupt our religi servic just to accommod a bunch of lousi atheist . they ’ re get no special privileg from me . they can stay right where they are and pray with the rest of us . and what ’ s all thi about enlist men ? just how the hell do they get into thi act ? ” the chaplain felt hi face flush . “ i ’ m sorri , sir . i just assum you would want the enlist men to be present , sinc they would be go along on the same mission. ” “ well , i don ’ t . they ’ ve got a god and a chaplain of their own , haven ’ t they ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ what are you talk about ? you mean they pray to the same god we do ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ and he listen ? ” “ i think so , sir. ” “ well , i ’ ll be damn , ” remark the colonel , and he snort to himself in quizzic amus . hi spirit droop suddenli a moment later , and he ran hi hand nervous over hi short , black , gray curl . “ do you realli think it ’ s a good idea to let the enlist men in ? ” he ask with concern . “ i should think it onli proper , sir. ” “ i ’ d like to keep them out , ” confid the colonel , and began crack hi knuckl savag as he wander back and forth . “ oh , don ’ t get me wrong , chaplain . it isn ’ t that i think the enlist men are dirti , common and inferior . it ’ s that we just don ’ t have enough room . frankli , though , i ’ d just as soon the offic and enlist men didn ’ t fratern in the brief room . they see enough of each other dure the mission , it seem to me . some of my veri best friend are enlist men , you understand , but that ’ s about as close as i care to let them come . honestli now , chaplain , you wouldn ’ t want your sister to marri an enlist man , would you ? ” “ my sister is an enlist man , sir , ” the chaplain repli . the colonel stop in hi track again and eye the chaplain sharpli to make certain he wa not be ridicul . “ just what do you mean by that remark , chaplain ? are you tri to be funni ? ” “ oh , no , sir , ” the chaplain hasten to explain with a look of excruci discomfort . “ she ’ s a master sergeant in the marines. ” the colonel had never like the chaplain and now he loath and distrust him . he experienc a keen premonit of danger and wonder if the chaplain too were plot against him , if the chaplain ’ s retic , unimpress manner were realli just a sinist disguis mask a fieri ambit that , way down deep , wa crafti and unscrupul . there wa someth funni about the chaplain , and the colonel soon detect what it wa . the chaplain wa stand stiffli at attent , for the colonel had forgotten to put him at eas . let him stay that way , the colonel decid vindict , just to show him who wa boss and to safeguard himself against ani loss of digniti that might devolv from hi acknowledg the omiss . colonel cathcart wa drawn hypnot toward the window with a massiv , dull stare of moodi introspect . the enlist men were alway treacher , he decid . he look downward in mourn gloom at the skeet-shoot rang he had order built for the offic on hi headquart staff , and he recal the mortifi afternoon gener dreedl had tongue-lash him ruthlessli in front of colonel korn and major danbi and order him to throw open the rang to all the enlist men and offic on combat duti . the skeet-shoot rang had been a real black eye for him , colonel cathcart wa forc to conclud . he wa posit that gener dreedl had never forgotten it , even though he wa posit that gener dreedl didn ’ t even rememb it , which wa realli veri unjust , colonel cathcart lament , sinc the idea of a skeet-shoot rang itself should have been a real feather in hi cap , even though it had been such a real black eye . colonel cathcart wa helpless to assess exactli how much ground he had gain or lost with hi goddam skeet-shoot rang and wish that colonel korn were in hi offic right then to evalu the entir episod for him still one more time and assuag hi fear . it wa all veri perplex , all veri discourag . colonel cathcart took the cigarett holder out of hi mouth , stood it on end insid the pocket of hi shirt , and began gnaw on the fingernail of both hand grievous . everybodi wa against him , and he wa sick to hi soul that colonel korn wa not with him in thi moment of crisi to help him decid what to do about the prayer meet . he had almost no faith at all in the chaplain , who wa still onli a captain . “ do you think , ” he ask , “ that keep the enlist men out might interfer with our chanc of get result ? ” the chaplain hesit , feel himself on unfamiliar ground again . “ ye , sir , ” he repli final . “ i think it ’ s conceiv that such an action could interfer with your chanc of have the prayer for a tighter bomb pattern answered. ” “ i wasn ’ t even think about that ! ” cri the colonel , with hi eye blink and splash like puddl . “ you mean that god might even decid to punish me by give us a looser bomb pattern ? ” “ ye , sir , ” said the chaplain . “ it ’ s conceiv he might. ” “ the hell with it , then , ” the colonel assert in a huff of independ . “ i ’ m not go to set these damn prayer meet up just to make thing wors than they are. ” with a scorn snicker , he settl himself behind hi desk , replac the empti cigarett holder in hi mouth and laps into parturi silenc for a few moment . “ now i think about it , ” he confess , as much to himself as to the chaplain , “ have the men pray to god probabl wasn ’ t such a hot idea anyway . the editor of the saturday even post might not have co-operated. ” the colonel abandon hi project with remors , for he had conceiv it entir on hi own and had hope to unveil it as a strike demonstr to everyon that he had no real need for colonel korn . onc it wa gone , he wa glad to be rid of it , for he had been troubl from the start by the danger of institut the plan without first check it out with colonel korn . he heav an immens sigh of content . he had a much higher opinion of himself now that hi idea wa abandon , for he had made a veri wise decis , he felt , and , most import , he had made thi wise decis without consult colonel korn . “ will that be all , sir ? ” ask the chaplain . “ yeah , ” said colonel cathcart . “ unless you ’ ve got someth els to suggest. ” “ no , sir . only… ” the colonel lift hi eye as though affront and studi the chaplain with aloof distrust . “ onli what , chaplain ? ” “ sir , ” said the chaplain , “ some of the men are veri upset sinc you rais the number of mission to sixti . they ’ ve ask me to speak to you about it. ” the colonel wa silent . the chaplain ’ s face redden to the root of hi sandi hair as he wait . the colonel kept him squirm a long time with a fix , uninterest look devoid of all emot . “ tell them there ’ s a war go on , ” he advis final in a flat voic . “ thank you , sir , i will , ” the chaplain repli in a flood of gratitud becaus the colonel had final said someth . “ they were wonder whi you couldn ’ t requisit some of the replac crew that are wait in africa to take their place and then let them go home. ” “ that ’ s an administr matter , ” the colonel said . “ it ’ s none of their business. ” he point languidli toward the wall . “ help yourself to a plum tomato , chaplain . go ahead , it ’ s on me. ” “ thank you , sir . sir- “ “ don ’ t mention it . how do you like live out there in the wood , chaplain ? is everyth hunki dori ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ that ’ s good . you get in touch with us if you need anything. ” “ ye , sir . thank you , sir . sir- “ “ thank for drop around , chaplain . i ’ ve got some work to do now . you ’ ll let me know if you can think of anyth for get our name into the saturday even post , won ’ t you ? ” “ ye , sir , i will. ” the chaplain brace himself with a prodigi effort of the will and plung ahead brazenli . “ i ’ m particularli concern about the condit of one of the bombardi , sir . yossarian. ” the colonel glanc up quickli with a start of vagu recognit . “ who ? ” he ask in alarm . “ yossarian , sir. ” “ yossarian ? ” “ ye , sir . yossarian . he ’ s in a veri bad way , sir . i ’ m afraid he won ’ t be abl to suffer much longer without do someth desperate. ” “ is that a fact , chaplain ? ” “ ye , sir . i ’ m afraid it is. ” the colonel thought about it in heavi silenc for a few moment . “ tell him to trust in god , ” he advis final . “ thank you , sir , ” said the chaplain . “ i will. ” 20 corpor whitcomb the late-august morn sun wa hot and steami , and there wa no breez on the balconi . the chaplain move slowli . he wa downcast and burden with self-reproach when he step without nois from the colonel ’ s offic on hi rubber-sol and rubber-heel brown shoe . he hate himself for what he constru to be hi own cowardic . he had intend to take a much stronger stand with colonel cathcart on the matter of the sixti mission , to speak out with courag , logic and eloqu on a subject about which he had begun to feel veri deepli . instead he had fail miser , had choke up onc again in the face of opposit from a stronger person . it wa a familiar , ignomini experi , and hi opinion of himself wa low . he choke up even more a second later when he spi colonel korn ’ s tubbi monochrom figur trot up the curv , wide , yellow stone staircas toward him in lackadais hast from the great dilapid lobbi below with it lofti wall of crack dark marbl and circular floor of crack grimi tile . the chaplain wa even more frighten of colonel korn than he wa of colonel cathcart . the swarthi , middle-ag lieuten colonel with the rimless , ici glass and facet , bald , domelik pate that he wa alway touch sensit with the tip of hi splay finger dislik the chaplain and wa impolit to him frequent . he kept the chaplain in a constant state of terror with hi curt , deris tongu and hi know , cynic eye that the chaplain wa never brave enough to meet for more than an accident second . inevit , the chaplain ’ s attent , as he cower meekli befor him , focus on colonel korn ’ s midriff , where the shirttail bunch up from insid hi sag belt and balloon down over hi waist gave him an appear of slovenli girth and made him seem inch shorter than hi middl height . colonel korn wa an untidi disdain man with an oili skin and deep , hard line run almost straight down from hi nose between hi crepuscular jowl and hi squar , cleft chin . hi face wa dour , and he glanc at the chaplain without recognit as the two drew close on the staircas and prepar to pass . “ hiya , father , ” he said tonelessli without look at the chaplain . “ how ’ s it go ? ” “ good morn , sir , ” the chaplain repli , discern wise that colonel korn expect noth more in the way of a respons . colonel korn wa proceed up the stair without slacken hi pace , and the chaplain resist the temptat to remind him again that he wa not a cathol but an anabaptist , and that it wa therefor neither necessari nor correct to address him as father . he wa almost certain now that colonel korn rememb and that call him father with a look of such bland innoc wa just anoth one of colonel korn ’ s method of taunt him becaus he wa onli an anabaptist . colonel korn halt without warn when he wa almost by and came whirl back down upon the chaplain with a glare of infuri suspicion . the chaplain wa petrifi . “ what are you do with that plum tomato , chaplain ? ” colonel korn demand roughli . the chaplain look down hi arm with surpris at the plum tomato colonel cathcart had invit him to take . “ i got it in colonel cathcart ’ s offic , sir , ” he manag to repli . “ doe the colonel know you took it ? ” “ ye , sir . he gave it to me. ” “ oh , in that case i guess it ’ s okay , ” colonel korn said , mollifi . he smile without warmth , jab the crumpl fold of hi shirt back down insid hi trouser with hi thumb . hi eye glint keenli with a privat and satisfi mischief . “ what did colonel cathcart want to see you about , father ? ” he ask suddenli . the chaplain wa tongue-ti with indecis for a moment . “ i don ’ t think i ought- “ “ say prayer to the editor of the saturday even post ? ” the chaplain almost smile . “ ye , sir. ” colonel korn wa enchant with hi own intuit . he laugh disparagingli . “ you know , i wa afraid he ’ d begin think about someth so ridicul as soon as he saw thi week ’ s saturday even post . i hope you succeed in show him what an atroci idea it is. ” “ he ha decid against it , sir. ” “ that ’ s good . i ’ m glad you convinc him that the editor of the saturday even post were not like to run that same stori twice just to give some public to some obscur colonel . how are thing in the wilder , father ? are you abl to manag out there ? ” “ ye , sir . everyth is work out. ” “ that ’ s good . i ’ m happi to hear you have noth to complain about . let us know if you need anyth to make you comfort . we all want you to have a good time out there. ” “ thank you , sir . i will. ” nois of a grow stir rose from the lobbi below . it wa almost lunchtim , and the earliest arriv were drift into the headquart mess hall , the enlist men and offic separ into differ dine hall on face side of the archaic rotunda . colonel korn stop smile . “ you had lunch with us here just a day or so ago , didn ’ t you , father ? ” he ask meaning . “ ye , sir . the day befor yesterday. ” “ that ’ s what i thought , ” colonel korn said , and paus to let hi point sink in . “ well , take it easi , father . i ’ ll see you around when it ’ s time for you to eat here again. ” “ thank you , sir. ” the chaplain wa not certain at which of the five offic ’ and five enlist men ’ s mess hall he wa schedul to have lunch that day , for the system of rotat work out for him by colonel korn wa complic , and he had forgotten hi record back in hi tent . the chaplain wa the onli offic attach to group headquart who did not resid in the molder red-ston group headquart build itself or in ani of the smaller satellit structur that rose about the ground in disjunct relationship . the chaplain live in a clear in the wood about four mile away between the offic ’ club and the first of the four squadron area that stretch away from group headquart in a distant line . the chaplain live alon in a spaciou , squar tent that wa also hi offic . sound of revelri travel to him at night from the offic ’ club and kept him awak often as he turn and toss on hi cot in passiv , half-voluntari exil . he wa not abl to gaug the effect of the mild pill he took occasion to help him sleep and felt guilti about it for day afterward . the onli one who live with the chaplain in hi clear in the wood wa corpor whitcomb , hi assist . corpor whitcomb , an atheist , wa a disgruntl subordin who felt he could do the chaplain ’ s job much better than the chaplain wa do it and view himself , therefor , as an underprivileg victim of social inequ . he live in a tent of hi own as spaciou and squar as the chaplain ’ s . he wa openli rude and contemptu to the chaplain onc he discov that the chaplain would let him get away with it . the border of the two tent in the clear stood no more than four or five feet apart . it wa colonel korn who had map out thi way of life for the chaplain . one good reason for make the chaplain live outsid the group headquart build wa colonel korn ’ s theori that dwell in a tent as most of hi parishion did would bring him into closer commun with them . anoth good reason wa the fact that have the chaplain around headquart all the time made the other offic uncomfort . it wa one thing to maintain liaison with the lord , and they were all in favor of that ; it wa someth els , though , to have him hang around twenty-four hour a day . all in all , as colonel korn describ it to major danbi , the jitteri and goggle-ey group oper offic , the chaplain had it pretti soft ; he had littl more to do than listen to the troubl of other , buri the dead , visit the bedridden and conduct religi servic . and there were not so mani dead for him to buri ani more , colonel korn point out , sinc opposit from german fighter plane had virtual ceas and sinc close to nineti per cent of what fatal there still were , he estim , perish behind the enemi line or disappear insid the cloud , where the chaplain had noth to do with dispos of the remain . the religi servic were certainli no great strain , either , sinc they were conduct onli onc a week at the group headquart build and were attend by veri few of the men . actual , the chaplain wa learn to love it in hi clear in the wood . both he and corpor whitcomb had been provid with everi conveni so that neither might ever plead discomfort as a basi for seek permiss to return to the headquart build . the chaplain rotat hi breakfast , lunch and dinner in separ set among the eight squadron mess hall and ate everi fifth meal in the enlist men ’ s mess at group headquart and everi tenth meal at the offic ’ mess there . back home in wisconsin the chaplain had been veri fond of garden , and hi heart well with a gloriou impress of fertil and fruition each time he contempl the low , prickli bough of the stunt tree and the waist-high weed and thicket by which he wa almost wall in . in the spring he had long to plant begonia and zinnia in a narrow bed around hi tent but had been deter by hi fear of corpor whitcomb ’ s rancor . the chaplain relish the privaci and isol of hi verdant surround and the reveri and medit that live there foster . fewer peopl came to him with their troubl than formerli , and he allow himself a measur of gratitud for that too . the chaplain did not mix freeli and wa not comfort in convers . he miss hi wife and hi three small children , and she miss him . what displeas corpor whitcomb most about the chaplain , apart from the fact that the chaplain believ in god , wa hi lack of initi and aggress . corpor whitcomb regard the low attend at religi servic as a sad reflect of hi own statu . hi mind germin feverishli with challeng new idea for spark the great spiritu reviv of which he dream himself the architect-box lunch , church social , form letter to the famili of men kill and injur in combat , censorship , bingo . but the chaplain block him . corpor whitcomb bridl with vexat beneath the chaplain ’ s restraint , for he spi room for improv everywher . it wa peopl like the chaplain , he conclud , who were respons for give religion such a bad name and make pariah out of them both . unlik the chaplain , corpor whitcomb detest the seclus of the clear in the wood . one of the first thing he intend to do after he depos the chaplain wa move back into the group headquart build , where he could be right in the thick of thing . when the chaplain drove back into the clear after leav colonel korn , corpor whitcomb wa outsid in the muggi haze talk in conspiratori tone to a strang chubbi man in a maroon corduroy bathrob and gray flannel pajama . the chaplain recogn the bathrob and pajama as offici hospit attir . neither of the two men gave him ani sign of recognit . the stranger ’ s gum had been paint purpl ; hi corduroy bathrob wa decor in back with a pictur of a b-25 nose through orang burst of flak and in front with six neat row of tini bomb signifi sixti combat mission flown . the chaplain wa so struck by the sight that he stop to stare . both men broke off their convers and wait in stoni silenc for him to go . the chaplain hurri insid hi tent . he heard , or imagin he heard , them titter . corpor whitcomb walk in a moment later and demand , “ what ’ s do ? ” “ there isn ’ t anyth new , ” the chaplain repli with avert eye . “ wa anyon here to see me ? ” “ just that crackpot yossarian again . he ’ s a real troublemak , isn ’ t he ? ” “ i ’ m not so sure he ’ s a crackpot , ” the chaplain observ . “ that ’ s right , take hi part , ” said corpor whitcomb in an injur tone , and stamp out . the chaplain could not believ that corpor whitcomb wa offend again and had realli walk out . as soon as he did realiz it , corpor whitcomb walk back in . “ you alway side with other peopl , ” corpor whitcomb accus . “ you don ’ t back up your men . that ’ s one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you. ” “ i didn ’ t intend to side with him , ” the chaplain apolog . “ i wa just make a statement. ” “ what did colonel cathcart want ? ” “ it wasn ’ t anyth import . he just want to discuss the possibl of say prayer in the brief room befor each mission. ” “ all right , don ’ t tell me , ” corpor whitcomb snap and walk out again . the chaplain felt terribl . no matter how consider he tri to be , it seem he alway manag to hurt corpor whitcomb ’ s feel . he gaze down remors and saw that the orderli forc upon him by colonel korn to keep hi tent clean and attend to hi belong had neglect to shine hi shoe again . corpor whitcomb came back in . “ you never trust me with inform , ” he whine trucul . “ you don ’ t have confid in your men . that ’ s anoth one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you. ” “ ye , i do , ” the chaplain assur him guiltili . “ i have lot of confid in you. ” “ then how about those letter ? ” “ no , not now , ” the chaplain plead , cring . “ not the letter . pleas don ’ t bring that up again . i ’ ll let you know if i have a chang of mind. ” corpor whitcomb look furiou . “ is that so ? well , it ’ s all right for you to just sit there and shake your head while i do all the work . didn ’ t you see the guy outsid with all those pictur paint on hi bathrob ? ” “ is he here to see me ? ” “ no , ” corpor whitcomb said , and walk out . it wa hot and humid insid the tent , and the chaplain felt himself turn damp . he listen like an unwil eavesdropp to the muffl , indistinguish drone of the lower voic outsid . as he sat inertli at the ricketi bridg tabl that serv as a desk , hi lip were close , hi eye were blank , and hi face , with it pale ochr hue and ancient , confin cluster of minut acn pit , had the color and textur of an uncrack almond shell . he rack hi memori for some clue to the origin of corpor whitcomb ’ s bitter toward him . in some way he wa unabl to fathom , he wa convinc he had done him some unforgiv wrong . it seem incred that such last ire as corpor whitcomb ’ s could have stem from hi reject of bingo or the form letter home to the famili of the men kill in combat . the chaplain wa despond with an accept of hi own ineptitud . he had intend for some week to have a heart-to-heart talk with corpor whitcomb in order to find out what wa bother him , but wa alreadi asham of what he might find out . outsid the tent , corpor whitcomb snicker . the other man chuckl . for a few precari second , the chaplain tingl with a weird , occult sensat of have experienc the ident situat befor in some prior time or exist . he endeavor to trap and nourish the impress in order to predict , and perhap even control , what incid would occur next , but the afatu melt away unproduct , as he had known beforehand it would . déjà vu . the subtl , recur confus between illus and realiti that wa characterist of paramnesia fascin the chaplain , and he knew a number of thing about it . he knew , for exampl , that it wa call paramnesia , and he wa interest as well in such corollari optic phenomena as jamai vu , never seen , and presqu vu , almost seen . there were terrifi , sudden moment when object , concept and even peopl that the chaplain had live with almost all hi life inexplic took on an unfamiliar and irregular aspect that he had never seen befor and which made them total strang : jamai vu . and there were other moment when he almost saw absolut truth in brilliant flash of clariti that almost came to him : presqu vu . the episod of the nake man in the tree at snowden ’ s funer mystifi him thoroughli . it wa not déjà vu , for at the time he had experienc no sensat of ever have seen a nake man in a tree at snowden ’ s funer befor . it wa not jamai vu , sinc the apparit wa not of someon , or someth , familiar appear to him in an unfamiliar guis . and it wa certainli not presqu vu , for the chaplain did see him . a jeep start up with a backfir directli outsid and roar away . had the nake man in the tree at snowden ’ s funer been mere a hallucin ? or had it been a true revel ? the chaplain trembl at the mere idea . he want desper to confid in yossarian , but each time he thought about the occurr he decid not to think about it ani further , although now that he did think about it he could not be sure that he ever realli had thought about it . corpor whitcomb saunter back in wear a shini new smirk and lean hi elbow impertin against the center pole of the chaplain ’ s tent . “ do you know who that guy in the red bathrob wa ? ” he ask boast . “ that wa a c.i.d . man with a fractur nose . he came down here from the hospit on offici busi . he ’ s conduct an investigation. ” the chaplain rais hi eye quickli in obsequi commiser . “ i hope you ’ re not in ani troubl . is there anyth i can do ? ” “ no , i ’ m not in ani troubl , ” corpor whitcomb repli with a grin . “ you are . they ’ re go to crack down on you for sign washington irv ’ s name to all those letter you ’ ve been sign washington irv ’ s name to . how do you like that ? ” “ i haven ’ t been sign washington irv ’ s name to ani letter , ” said the chaplain . “ you don ’ t have to lie to me , ” corpor whitcomb answer . “ i ’ m not the one you have to convince. ” “ but i ’ m not lying. ” “ i don ’ t care whether you ’ re lie or not . they ’ re go to get you for intercept major major ’ s correspond , too . a lot of that stuff is classifi information. ” “ what correspond ? ” ask the chaplain plaintiv in rise exasper . “ i ’ ve never even seen ani of major major ’ s correspondence. ” “ you don ’ t have to lie to me , ” corpor whitcomb repli . “ i ’ m not the one you have to convince. ” “ but i ’ m not lie ! ” protest the chaplain . “ i don ’ t see whi you have to shout at me , ” corpor whitcomb retort with an injur look . he came away from the center pole and shook hi finger at the chaplain for emphasi . “ i just did you the biggest favor anybodi ever did you in your whole life , and you don ’ t even realiz it . everi time he tri to report you to hi superior , somebodi up at the hospit censor out the detail . he ’ s been go batti for week tri to turn you in . i just put a censor ’ s okay on hi letter without even read it . that will make a veri good impress for you up at c.i.d . headquart . it will let them know that we ’ re not the least bit afraid to have the whole truth about you come out. ” the chaplain wa reel with confus . “ but you aren ’ t author to censor letter , are you ? ” “ of cours not , ” corpor whitcomb answer . “ onli offic are ever author to do that . i censor it in your name. ” “ but i ’ m not author to censor letter either . am i ? ” “ i took care of that for you , too , ” corpor whitcomb assur him . “ i sign somebodi els ’ s name for you. ” “ isn ’ t that forgeri ? ” “ oh , don ’ t worri about that either . the onli one who might complain in a case of forgeri is the person whose name you forg , and i look out for your interest by pick a dead man . i use washington irv ’ s name. ” corpor whitcomb scrutin the chaplain ’ s face close for some sign of rebellion and then breez ahead confid with conceal ironi . “ that wa pretti quick think on my part , wasn ’ t it ? ” “ i don ’ t know , ” the chaplain wail softli in a quaver voic , squint with grotesqu contort of anguish and incomprehens . “ i don ’ t think i understand all you ’ ve been tell me . how will it make a good impress for me if you sign washington irv ’ s name instead of my own ? ” “ becaus they ’ re convinc that you are washington irv . don ’ t you see ? they ’ ll know it wa you. ” “ but isn ’ t that the veri belief we want to dispel ? won ’ t thi help them prove it ? ” “ if i thought you were go to be so stuffi about it , i wouldn ’ t even have tri to help , ” corpor whitcomb declar indignantli , and walk out . a second later he walk back in . “ i just did you the biggest favor anybodi ever did you in your whole life and you don ’ t even know it . you don ’ t know how to show your appreci . that ’ s anoth one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you. ” “ i ’ m sorri , ” the chaplain apolog contrit . “ i realli am sorri . it ’ s just that i ’ m so complet stun by all you ’ re tell me that i don ’ t even realiz what i ’ m say . i ’ m realli veri grate to you. ” “ then how about let me send out those form letter ? ” corpor whitcomb demand immedi . “ can i begin work on the first draft ? ” the chaplain ’ s jaw drop in astonish . “ no , no , ” he groan . “ not now. ” corpor whitcomb wa incens . “ i ’ m the best friend you ’ ve got and you don ’ t even know it , ” he assert belliger , and walk out of the chaplain ’ s tent . he walk back in . “ i ’ m on your side and you don ’ t even realiz it . don ’ t you know what seriou troubl you ’ re in ? that c.i.d . man ha gone rush back to the hospit to write a brand-new report on you about that tomato. ” “ what tomato ? ” the chaplain ask , blink . “ the plum tomato you were hide in your hand when you first show up here . there it is . the tomato you ’ re still hold in your hand right thi veri minut ! ” the captain unclench hi finger with surpris and saw that he wa still hold the plum tomato he had obtain in colonel cathcart ’ s offic . he set it down quickli on the bridg tabl . “ i got thi tomato from colonel cathcart , ” he said , and wa struck by how ludicr hi explan sound . “ he insist i take it. ” “ you don ’ t have to lie to me , ” corpor whitcomb answer . “ i don ’ t care whether you stole it from him or not. ” “ stole it ? ” the chaplain exclaim with amaz . “ whi should i want to steal a plum tomato ? ” “ that ’ s exactli what had us both stump , ” said corpor whitcomb . “ and then the c.i.d . man figur out you might have some import secret paper hidden away insid it. ” the chaplain sag limpli beneath the mountain weight of hi despair . “ i don ’ t have ani import secret paper hidden away insid it , ” he state simpli . “ i didn ’ t even want it to begin with . here , you can have it and see for yourself. ” “ i don ’ t want it. ” “ pleas take it away , ” the chaplain plead in a voic that wa bare audibl . “ i want to be rid of it. ” “ i don ’ t want it , ” corpor whitcomb snap again , and stalk out with an angri face , suppress a smile of great jubil at have forg a power new allianc with the c.i.d . man and at have succeed again in convinc the chaplain that he wa realli displeas . poor whitcomb , sigh the chaplain , and blame himself for hi assist ’ s malais . he sat mute in a ponder , stultifi melancholi , wait expectantli for corpor whitcomb to walk back in . he wa disappoint as he heard the peremptori crunch of corpor whitcomb ’ s footstep reced into silenc . there wa noth he want to do next . he decid to pass up lunch for a milki way and a babi ruth from hi foot locker and a few swallow of luke-warm water from hi canteen . he felt himself surround by dens , overwhelm fog of possibl in which he could perceiv no glimmer of light . he dread what colonel cathcart would think when the news that he wa suspect of be washington irv wa brought to him , then fell to fret over what colonel cathcart wa alreadi think about him for even have broach the subject of sixti mission . there wa so much unhappi in the world , he reflect , bow hi head dismal beneath the tragic thought , and there wa noth he could do about anybodi ’ s , least of all hi own . 21 gener dreedl colonel cathcart wa not think anyth at all about the chaplain , but wa tangl up in a brand-new , menac problem of hi own : yossarian ! yossarian ! the mere sound of that execr , ugli name made hi blood run cold and hi breath come in labor gasp . the chaplain ’ s first mention of the name yossarian ! had toll deep in hi memori like a portent gong . as soon as the latch of the door had click shut , the whole humili recollect of the nake man in format came cascad down upon him in a mortifi , choke flood of sting detail . he began to perspir and trembl . there wa a sinist and unlik coincid expos that wa too diabol in implic to be anyth less than the most hideou of omen . the name of the man who had stood nake in rank that day to receiv hi distinguish fli cross from gener dreedl had also been-yossarian ! and now it wa a man name yossarian who wa threaten to make troubl over the sixti mission he had just order the men in hi group to fli . colonel cathcart wonder gloomili if it wa the same yossarian . he climb to hi feet with an air of intoler woe and began move about hi offic . he felt himself in the presenc of the mysteri . the nake man in format , he conced cheerlessli , had been a real black eye for him . so had the tamper with the bomb line befor the mission to bologna and the seven-day delay in destroy the bridg at ferrara , even though destroy the bridg at ferrara final , he rememb with glee , had been a real feather in hi cap , although lose a plane there the second time around , he recal in deject , had been anoth black eye , even though he had won anoth real feather in hi cap by get a medal approv for the bombardi who had gotten him the real black eye in the first place by go around over the target twice . that bombardi ’ s name , he rememb suddenli with anoth stupefi shock , had also been yossarian ! now there were three ! hi viscou eye bulg with astonish and he whip himself around in alarm to see what wa take place behind him . a moment ago there had been no yossarian in hi life ; now they were multipli like hobgoblin . he tri to make himself grow calm . yossarian wa not a common name ; perhap there were not realli three yossarian but onli two yossarian , or mayb even onli one yossarian-but that realli made no differ ! the colonel wa still in grave peril . intuit warn him that he wa draw close to some immens and inscrut cosmic climax , and hi broad , meati , tower frame tingl from head to toe at the thought that yossarian , whoever he would eventu turn out to be , wa destin to serv as hi nemesi . colonel cathcart wa not superstiti , but he did believ in omen , and he sat right back down behind hi desk and made a cryptic notat on hi memorandum pad to look into the whole suspici busi of the yossarian right away . he wrote hi remind to himself in a heavi and decis hand , amplifi it sharpli with a seri of code punctuat mark and underlin the whole messag twice , so that it read : yossarian ! ! ! ( ? ) ! the colonel sat back when he had finish and wa extrem pleas with himself for the prompt action he had just taken to meet thi sinist crisi . yossarian-th veri sight of the name made him shudder . there were so mani ess in it . it just had to be subvers . it wa like the word subvers itself . it wa like sediti and insidi too , and like socialist , suspici , fascist and communist . it wa an odiou , alien , distast name , that just did not inspir confid . it wa not at all like such clean , crisp , honest , american name as cathcart , peckem and dreedl . colonel cathcart rose slowli and began drift about hi offic again . almost unconsci , he pick up a plum tomato from the top of one of the bushel and took a voraci bite . he made a wri face at onc and threw the rest of the plum tomato into hi waste-basket . the colonel did not like plum tomato , not even when they were hi own , and these were not even hi own . these had been purchas in differ market place all over pianosa by colonel korn under variou ident , move up to the colonel ’ s farmhous in the hill in the dead of night , and transport down to group headquart the next morn for sale to milo , who paid colonel cathcart and colonel korn premium price for them . colonel cathcart often wonder if what they were do with the plum tomato wa legal , but colonel korn said it wa , and he tri not to brood about it too often . he had no way of know whether or not the hous in the hill wa legal , either , sinc colonel korn had made all the arrang . colonel cathcart did not know if he own the hous or rent it , from whom he had acquir it or how much , if anyth , it wa cost . colonel korn wa the lawyer , and if colonel korn assur him that fraud , extort , currenc manipul , embezzl , incom tax evas and black-market specul were legal , colonel cathcart wa in no posit to disagre with him . all colonel cathcart knew about hi hous in the hill wa that he had such a hous and hate it . he wa never so bore as when spend there the two or three day everi other week necessari to sustain the illus that hi damp and drafti stone farmhous in the hill wa a golden palac of carnal delight . offic ’ club everywher pulsat with blur but know account of lavish , hushed-up drink and sex orgi there and of secret , intim night of ecstasi with the most beauti , the most tantal , the most readili arous and most easili satisfi italian courtesan , film actress , model and countess . no such privat night of ecstasi or hushed-up drink and sex orgi ever occur . they might have occur if either gener dreedl or gener peckem had onc evinc an interest in take part in orgi with him , but neither ever did , and the colonel wa certainli not go to wast hi time and energi make love to beauti women unless there wa someth in it for him . the colonel dread hi dank lone night at hi farmhous and the dull , unev day . he had much more fun back at group , browbeat everyon he wasn ’ t afraid of . howev , as colonel korn kept remind him , there wa not much glamour in have a farmhous in the hill if he never use it . he drove off to hi farmhous each time in a mood of self-piti . he carri a shotgun in hi jeep and spent the monoton hour there shoot it at bird and at the plum tomato that did grow there in untend row and were too much troubl to harvest . among those offic of inferior rank toward whom colonel cathcart still deem it prudent to show respect , he includ major -- de coverley , even though he did not want to and wa not sure he even had to . major -- de coverley wa as great a mysteri to him as he wa to major major and to everyon els who ever took notic of him . colonel cathcart had no idea whether to look up or look down in hi attitud toward major -- de coverley . major -- de coverley wa onli a major , even though he wa age older than colonel cathcart ; at the same time , so mani other peopl treat major -- de coverley with such profound and fear vener that colonel cathcart had a hunch they might know someth . major -- de coverley wa an omin , incomprehens presenc who kept him constantli on edg and of whom even colonel korn tend to be wari . everyon wa afraid of him , and no one knew whi . no one even knew major -- de coverley ’ s first name , becaus no one had ever had the temer to ask him . colonel cathcart knew that major -- de coverley wa away and he rejoic in hi absenc until it occur to him that major -- de coverley might be away somewher conspir against him , and then he wish that major -- de coverley were back in hi squadron where he belong so that he could be watch . in a littl while colonel cathcart ’ s arch began to ach from pace back and forth so much . he sat down behind hi desk again and resolv to embark upon a matur and systemat evalu of the entir militari situat . with the businesslik air of a man who know how to get thing done , he found a larg white pad , drew a straight line down the middl and cross it near the top , divid the page into two blank column of equal width . he rest a moment in critic rumin . then he huddl over hi desk , and at the head of the left column , in a cramp and finicki hand , he wrote , “ black eye ! ! ! ” at the top of the right column he wrote , “ feather in my cap ! ! ! ! ! ” he lean back onc more to inspect hi chart admiringli from an object perspect . after a few second of solemn deliber , he lick the tip of hi pencil care and wrote under “ black eye ! ! ! , ” after intent interv : ferrara bologna ( bomb line move on map dure ) skeet rang nake man inform ( after avignon ) then he ad : food poison ( dure bologna ) and moan ( epidem of dure avignon brief ) then he ad : chaplain ( hang around offic ’ club everi night ) he decid to be charit about the chaplain , even though he did not like him , and under “ feather in my cap ! ! ! ! ! ” he wrote : chaplain ( hang around offic ’ club everi night ) the two chaplain entri , therefor , neutral each other . alongsid “ ferrara ” and “ nake man in format ( after avignon ) ” he then wrote : yossarian ! alongsid “ bologna ( bomb line move on map dure ) ” “ food poison ( dure bologna ) ” and “ moan ( epidem of dure avignon brief ) ” he wrote in a bold , decis hand : ? those entri label “ ? ” were the one he want to investig immedi to determin if yossarian had play ani part in them . suddenli hi arm began to shake , and he wa unabl to write ani more . he rose to hi feet in terror , feel sticki and fat , and rush to the open window to gulp in fresh air . hi gaze fell on the skeet-rang , and he reel away with a sharp cri of distress , hi wild and feverish eye scan the wall of hi offic frantic as though they were swarm with yossarian . nobodi love him . gener dreedl hate him , although gener peckem like him , although he couldn ’ t be sure , sinc colonel cargil , gener peckem ’ s aid , undoubtedli had ambit of hi own and wa probabl sabotag him with gener peckem at everi opportun . the onli good colonel , he decid , wa a dead colonel , except for himself . the onli colonel he trust wa colonel moodu , and even he had an in with hi father-in-law . milo , of cours , had been the big feather in hi cap , although have hi group bomb by milo ’ s plane had probabl been a terribl black eye for him , even though milo had ultim still all protest by disclos the huge net profit the syndic had realiz on the deal with the enemi and convinc everyon that bomb hi own men and plane had therefor realli been a commend and veri lucr blow on the side of privat enterpris . the colonel wa insecur about milo becaus other colonel were tri to lure him away , and colonel cathcart still had that lousi big chief white halfoat in hi group who that lousi , lazi captain black claim wa the one realli respons for the bomb line ’ s be move dure the big sieg of bologna . colonel cathcart like big chief white halfoat becaus big chief white halfoat kept punch that lousi colonel moodu in the nose everi time he got drunk and colonel moodu wa around . he wish that big chief white halfoat would begin punch colonel korn in hi fat face , too . colonel korn wa a lousi smart aleck . someon at twenty-seventh air forc headquart had it in for him and sent back everi report he wrote with a blister rebuk , and colonel korn had bribe a clever mail clerk there name wintergreen to tri to find out who it wa . lose the plane over ferrara the second time around had not done him ani good , he had to admit , and neither had have that other plane disappear insid that cloud-that wa one he hadn ’ t even written down ! he tri to recal , longingli , if yossarian had been lost in that plane in the cloud and realiz that yossarian could not possibl have been lost in that plane in the cloud if he wa still around now rais such a big stink about have to fli a lousi five mission more . mayb sixti mission were too mani for the men to fli , colonel cathcart reason , if yossarian object to fli them , but he then rememb that forc hi men to fli more mission than everyon els wa the most tangibl achiev he had go for him . as colonel korn often remark , the war wa crawl with group command who were mere do their duti , and it requir just some sort of dramat gestur like make hi group fli more combat mission than ani other bomber group to spotlight hi uniqu qualiti of leadership . certainli none of the gener seem to object to what he wa do , although as far as he could detect they weren ’ t particularli impress either , which made him suspect that perhap sixti combat mission were not nearli enough and that he ought to increas the number at onc to seventi , eighti , a hundr , or even two hundr , three hundr , or six thousand ! certainli he would be much better off under somebodi suav like gener peckem than he wa under somebodi boorish and insensit like gener dreedl , becaus gener peckem had the discern , the intellig and the ivi leagu background to appreci and enjoy him at hi full valu , although gener peckem had never given the slightest indic that he appreci or enjoy him at all . colonel cathcart felt percept enough to realiz that visibl signal of recognit were never necessari between sophist , self-assur peopl like himself and gener peckem who could warm to each other from a distanc with innat mutual understand . it wa enough that they were of like kind , and he knew it wa onli a matter of wait discreetli for prefer until the right time , although it rot colonel cathcart ’ s self-esteem to observ that gener peckem never deliber sought him out and that he labor no harder to impress colonel cathcart with hi epigram and erudit than he did to impress anyon els in earshot , even enlist men . either colonel cathcart wasn ’ t get through to gener peckem or gener peckem wa not the scintil , discrimin , intellectu , forward-look person he pretend to be and it wa realli gener dreedl who wa sensit , charm , brilliant and sophist and under whom he would certainli be much better off , and suddenli colonel cathcart had absolut no concept of how strongli he stood with anyon and began bang on hi buzzer with hi fist for colonel korn to come run into hi offic and assur him that everybodi love him , that yossarian wa a figment of hi imagin , and that he wa make wonder progress in the splendid and valiant campaign he wa wage to becom a gener . actual , colonel cathcart did not have a chanc in hell of becom a gener . for one thing , there wa ex-p.f.c . wintergreen , who also want to be a gener and who alway distort , destroy , reject or misdirect ani correspond by , for or about colonel cathcart that might do him credit . for anoth , there alreadi wa a gener , gener dreedl who knew that gener peckem wa after hi job but did not know how to stop him . gener dreedl , the wing command , wa a blunt , chunki , barrel-chest man in hi earli fifti . hi nose wa squat and red , and he had lumpi white , bunched-up eyelid circl hi small gray eye like halo of bacon fat . he had a nurs and a son-in law , and he wa prone to long , ponder silenc when he had not been drink too much . gener dreedl had wast too much of hi time in the armi do hi job well , and now it wa too late . new power align had coalesc without him and he wa at a loss to cope with them . at unguard moment hi hard and sullen face slip into a somber , preoccupi look of defeat and frustrat . gener dreedl drank a great deal . hi mood were arbitrari and unpredict . “ war is hell , ” he declar frequent , drunk or sober , and he realli meant it , although that did not prevent him from make a good live out of it or from take hi son-in-law into the busi with him , even though the two bicker constantli . “ that bastard , ” gener dreedl would complain about hi son-in-law with a contemptu grunt to anyon who happen to be stand besid him at the curv of the bar of the offic ’ club . “ everyth he ’ s got he owe to me . i made him , that lousi son of a bitch ! he hasn ’ t got brain enough to get ahead on hi own. ” “ he think he know everyth , ” colonel moodu would retort in a sulk tone to hi own audienc at the other end of the bar . “ he can ’ t take critic and he won ’ t listen to advice. ” “ all he can do is give advic , ” gener dreedl would observ with a rasp snort . “ if it wasn ’ t for me , he ’ d still be a corporal. ” gener dreedl wa alway accompani by both colonel moodu and hi nurs , who wa as delect a piec of ass as anyon who saw her had ever laid eye on . gener dreedl ’ s nurs wa chubbi , short and blond . she had plump dimpl cheek , happi blue eye , and neat curli turned-up hair . she smile at everyon and never spoke at all unless she wa spoken to . her bosom wa lush and her complexion clear . she wa irresist , and men edg away from her care . she wa succul , sweet , docil and dumb , and she drove everyon crazi but gener dreedl . “ you should see her nake , ” gener dreedl chortl with croupi relish , while hi nurs stood smile proudli right at hi shoulder . “ back at wing she ’ s got a uniform in my room made of purpl silk that ’ s so tight her nippl stand out like bing cherri . milo got me the fabric . there isn ’ t even room enough for panti or a brassièr underneath . i make her wear it some night when moodu is around just to drive him crazy. ” gener dreedl laugh hoars . “ you should see what goe on insid that blous of her everi time she shift her weight . she drive him out of hi mind . the first time i catch him put a hand on her or ani other woman i ’ ll bust the horni bastard right down to privat and put him on k.p . for a year. ” “ he keep her around just to drive me crazi , ” colonel moodu accus aggrievedli at the other end of the bar . “ back at wing she ’ s got a uniform made out of purpl silk that ’ s so tight her nippl stand out like bing cherri . there isn ’ t even room for panti or a brassièr underneath . you should hear that rustl everi time she shift her weight . the first time i make a pass at her or ani other girl he ’ ll bust me right down to privat and put me on k.p . for a year . she drive me out of my mind. ” “ he hasn ’ t gotten laid sinc we ship oversea , ” confid gener dreedl , and hi squar grizzl head bob with sadist laughter at the fiendish idea . “ that ’ s one of the reason i never let him out of my sight , just so he can ’ t get to a woman . can you imagin what that poor son of a bitch is go through ? ” “ i haven ’ t been to bed with a woman sinc we ship oversea , ” colonel moodu whimper tear . “ can you imagin what i ’ m go through ? ” gener dreedl could be as intransig with anyon els when displeas as he wa with colonel moodu . he had no tast for sham , tact or pretens , and hi credo as a profession soldier wa unifi and concis : he believ that the young men who took order from him should be will to give up their live for the ideal , aspir and idiosyncrasi of the old men he took order from . the offic and enlist men in hi command had ident for him onli as militari quantiti . all he ask wa that they do their work ; beyond that , they were free to do whatev they pleas . they were free , as colonel cathcart wa free , to forc their men to fli sixti mission if they chose , and they were free , as yossarian had been free , to stand in format nake if they want to , although gener dreedl ’ s granit jaw swung open at the sight and he went stride dictatori right down the line to make certain that there realli wa a man wear noth but moccasin wait at attent in rank to receiv a medal from him . gener dreedl wa speechless . colonel cathcart began to faint when he spi yossarian , and colonel korn step up behind him and squeez hi arm in a strong grip . the silenc wa grotesqu . a steadi warm wind flow in from the beach , and an old cart fill with dirti straw rumbl into view on the main road , drawn by a black donkey and driven by a farmer in a flop hat and fade brown work cloth who paid no attent to the formal militari ceremoni take place in the small field on hi right . at last gener dreedl spoke . “ get back in the car , ” he snap over hi shoulder to hi nurs , who had follow him down the line . the nurs toddl away with a smile toward hi brown staff car , park about twenti yard away at the edg of the rectangular clear . gener dreedl wait in auster silenc until the car door slam and then demand , “ which one is thi ? ” colonel moodu check hi roster . “ thi one is yossarian , dad . he get a distinguish fli cross. ” “ well , i ’ ll be damn , ” mumbl gener dreedl , and hi ruddi monolith face soften with amus . “ whi aren ’ t you wear cloth , yossarian ? ” “ i don ’ t want to. ” “ what do you mean you don ’ t want to ? whi the hell don ’ t you want to ? ” “ i just don ’ t want to , sir. ” “ whi isn ’ t he wear cloth ? ” gener dreedl demand over hi shoulder of colonel cathcart . “ he ’ s talk to you , ” colonel korn whisper over colonel cathcart ’ s shoulder from behind , jab hi elbow sharpli into colonel cathcart ’ s back . “ whi isn ’ t he wear cloth ? ” colonel cathcart demand of colonel korn with a look of acut pain , tenderli nurs the spot where colonel korn had just jab him . “ whi isn ’ t he wear cloth ? ” colonel korn demand of captain piltchard and captain wren . “ a man wa kill in hi plane over avignon last week and bled all over him , ” captain wren repli . “ he swear he ’ s never go to wear a uniform again. ” “ a man wa kill in hi plane over avignon last week and bled all over him , ” colonel korn report directli to gener dreedl . “ hi uniform hasn ’ t come back from the laundri yet. ” “ where are hi other uniform ? ” “ they ’ re in the laundri , too. ” “ what about hi underwear ? ” gener dreedl demand . “ all hi underwear ’ s in the laundri , too , ” answer colonel korn . “ that sound like a lot of crap to me , ” gener dreedl declar . “ it is a lot of crap , sir , ” yossarian said . “ don ’ t you worri , sir , ” colonel cathcart promis gener dreedl with a threaten look at yossarian . “ you have my person word for it that thi man will be sever punished. ” “ what the hell do i care if he ’ s punish or not ? ” gener dreedl repli with surpris and irrit . “ he ’ s just won a medal . if he want to receiv it without ani cloth on , what the hell busi is it of your ? ” “ those are my sentiment exactli , sir ! ” colonel cathcart echo with resound enthusiasm and mop hi brow with a damp white handkerchief . “ but would you say that , sir , even in the light of gener peckem ’ s recent memorandum on the subject of appropri militari attir in combat area ? ” “ peckem ? ” gener dreedl ’ s face cloud . “ ye , sir , sir , ” said colonel cathcart obsequi . “ gener peckem even recommend that we send our men into combat in full-dress uniform so they ’ ll make a good impress on the enemi when they ’ re shot down. ” “ peckem ? ” repeat gener dreedl , still squint with bewilder . “ just what the hell doe peckem have to do with it ? ” colonel korn jab colonel cathcart sharpli again in the back with hi elbow . “ absolut noth , sir ! ” colonel cathcart respond spruce , winc in extrem pain and gingerli rub the spot where colonel korn had just jab him again . “ and that ’ s exactli whi i decid to take absolut no action at all until i first had an opportun to discuss it with you . shall we ignor it complet , sir ? ” gener dreedl ignor him complet , turn away from him in bale scorn to hand yossarian hi medal in it case . “ get my girl back from the car , ” he command colonel moodu crabbili , and wait in one spot with hi scowl face down until hi nurs had rejoin him . “ get word to the offic right away to kill that direct i just issu order the men to wear neckti on the combat mission , ” colonel cathcart whisper to colonel korn urgent out of the corner of hi mouth . “ i told you not to do it , ” colonel korn snicker . “ but you just wouldn ’ t listen to me. ” “ shhhh ! ” colonel cathcart caution . “ goddammit , korn , what did you do to my back ? ” colonel korn snicker again . gener dreedl ’ s nurs alway follow gener dreedl everywher he went , even into the brief room just befor the mission to avignon , where she stood with her asinin smile at the side of the platform and bloom like a fertil oasi at gener dreedl ’ s shoulder in her pink-and-green uniform . yossarian look at her and fell in love , desper . hi spirit sank , leav him empti insid and numb . he sat gaze in clammi want at her full red lip and dimpl cheek as he listen to major danbi describ in a monoton , didact male drone the heavi concentr of flak await them at avignon , and he moan in deep despair suddenli at the thought that he might never see again thi love woman to whom he had never spoken a word and whom he now love so pathet . he throb and ach with sorrow , fear and desir as he stare at her ; she wa so beauti . he worship the ground she stood on . he lick hi parch , thirst lip with a sticki tongu and moan in miseri again , loudli enough thi time to attract the startl , search glanc of the men sit around him on the row of crude wooden bench in their chocolate-color coveral and stitch white parachut har . nate turn to him quickli with alarm . “ what is it ? ” he whisper . “ what ’ s the matter ? ” yossarian did not hear him . he wa sick with lust and mesmer with regret . gener dreedl ’ s nurs wa onli a littl chubbi , and hi sens were stuf to congest with the yellow radianc of her hair and the unfelt pressur of her soft short finger , with the round , untast wealth of her nubil breast in her army-pink shirt that wa open wide at the throat and with the roll , ripen , triangular confluenc of her belli and thigh in her tight , slick forest-green gabardin offic ’ s pant . he drank her in insati from head to paint toenail . he never want to lose her . “ oooooooooooooh , ” he moan again , and thi time the whole room rippl at hi quaver , drawn-out cri . a wave of startl uneasi broke over the offic on the dai , and even major danbi , who had begun synchron the watch , wa distract momentarili as he count out the second and almost had to begin again . nate follow yossarian ’ s transfix gaze down the long frame auditorium until he came to gener dreedl ’ s nurs . he blanch with trepid when he guess what wa troubl yossarian . “ cut it out , will you ? ” nate warn in a fierc whisper . “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” yossarian moan a fourth time , thi time loudli enough for everyon to hear him distinctli . “ are you crazi ? ” nate hiss vehement . “ you ’ ll get into trouble. ” “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” dunbar answer yossarian from the opposit end of the room . nate recogn dunbar ’ s voic . the situat wa now out of control , and he turn away with a small moan . “ ooh. ” “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” dunbar moan back at him . “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” nate moan out loud in exasper when he realiz that he had just moan . “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” dunbar moan back at him again . “ ooooooooooooooooooooh , ” someon entir new chime in from anoth section of the room , and nate ’ s hair stood on end . yossarian and dunbar both repli while nate cring and hunt about futil for some hole in which to hide and take yossarian with him . a sprinkl of peopl were smother laughter . an elfin impuls possess nate and he moan intent the next time there wa a lull . anoth new voic answer . the flavor of disobedi wa titil , and nate moan deliber again , the next time he could squeez one in edgewis . still anoth new voic echo him . the room wa boil irrepress into bedlam . an eeri hubbub of voic wa rise . feet were scuffl , and thing began to drop from peopl ’ s fingers-pencil , comput , map case , clatter steel flak helmet . a number of men who were not moan were now giggl openli , and there wa no tell how far the unorgan insurrect of moan might have gone if gener dreedl himself had not come forward to quell it , step out determinedli in the center of the platform directli in front of major danbi , who , with hi earnest , persev head down , wa still concentr on hi wrist watch and say , “ …twenty-f seconds… twenty… fifteen… ” gener dreedl ’ s great , red domin face wa gnarl with perplex and oaken with awesom resolut . “ that will be all , men , ” he order ters , hi eye glare with disapprov and hi squar jaw firm , and that ’ s all there wa . “ i run a fight outfit , ” he told them sternli , when the room had grown absolut quiet and the men on the bench were all cower sheepishli , “ and there ’ ll be no more moan in thi group as long as i ’ m in command . is that clear ? ” it wa clear to everybodi but major danbi , who wa still concentr on hi wrist watch and count down the second aloud . “ …four… three… two… one… time ! ” call out major danbi , and rais hi eye triumphantli to discov that no one had been listen to him and that he would have to begin all over again . “ ooooh , ” he moan in frustrat . “ what wa that ? ” roar gener dreedl incredul , and whirl around in a murder rage upon major danbi , who stagger back in terrifi confus and began to quail and perspir . “ who is thi man ? ” “ m-major danbi , sir , ” colonel cathcart stammer . “ my group oper officer. ” “ take him out and shoot him , ” order gener dreedl . “ s-sir ? ” “ i said take him out and shoot him . can ’ t you hear ? ” “ ye , sir ! ” colonel cathcart respond smartli , swallow hard , and turn in a brisk manner to hi chauffeur and hi meteorologist . “ take major danbi out and shoot him. ” “ s-sir ? ” hi chauffeur and hi meteorologist stammer . “ i said take major danbi out and shoot him , ” colonel cathcart snap . “ can ’ t you hear ? ” the two young lieuten nod lumpishli and gape at each other in stun and flaccid reluct , each wait for the other to initi the procedur of take major danbi outsid and shoot him . neither had ever taken major danbi outsid and shot him befor . they inch their way dubious toward major danbi from opposit side . major danbi wa white with fear . hi leg collaps suddenli and he began to fall , and the two young lieuten sprang forward and seiz him under both arm to save him from slump to the floor . now that they had major danbi , the rest seem easi , but there were no gun . major danbi began to cri . colonel cathcart want to rush to hi side and comfort him , but did not want to look like a sissi in front of gener dreedl . he rememb that applebi and havermey alway brought their.45 automat on the mission , and he began to scan the row of men in search of them . as soon as major danbi began to cri , colonel moodu , who had been vacil wretchedli on the sidelin , could restrain himself no longer and step out diffid toward gener dreedl with a sickli air of self-sacrific . “ i think you ’ d better wait a minut , dad , ” he suggest hesitantli . “ i don ’ t think you can shoot him. ” gener dreedl wa infuri by hi intervent . “ who the hell say i can ’ t ? ” he thunder pugnaci in a voic loud enough to rattl the whole build . colonel moodu , hi face flush with embarrass , bent close to whisper into hi ear . “ whi the hell can ’ t i ? ” gener dreedl bellow . colonel moodu whisper some more . “ you mean i can ’ t shoot anyon i want to ? ” gener dreedl demand with uncompromis indign . he prick up hi ear with interest as colonel moodu continu whisper . “ is that a fact ? ” he inquir , hi rage tame by curios . “ ye , dad . i ’ m afraid it is. ” “ i guess you think you ’ re pretti goddam smart , don ’ t you ? ” gener dreedl lash out at colonel moodu suddenli . colonel moodu turn crimson again . “ no , dad , it isn ’ t- “ “ all right , let the insubordin son of a bitch go , ” gener dreedl snarl , turn bitterli away from hi son-in-law and bark peevishli at colonel cathcart ’ s chauffeur and colonel cathcart ’ s meteorologist . “ but get him out of thi build and keep him out . and let ’ s continu thi goddam brief befor the war end . i ’ ve never seen so much incompetence. ” colonel cathcart nod lame at gener dreedl and signal hi men hurriedli to push major danbi outsid the build . as soon as major danbi had been push outsid , though , there wa no one to continu the brief . everyon gawk at everyon els in oafish surpris . gener dreedl turn purpl with rage as noth happen . colonel cathcart had no idea what to do . he wa about to begin moan aloud when colonel korn came to the rescu by step forward and take control . colonel cathcart sigh with enorm , tear relief , almost overwhelm with gratitud . “ now , men , we ’ re go to synchron our watch , ” colonel korn began promptli in a sharp , command manner , roll hi eye flirtati in gener dreedl ’ s direct . “ we ’ re go to synchron our watch one time and one time onli , and if it doesn ’ t come off in that one time , gener dreedl and i are go to want to know whi . is that clear ? ” he flutter hi eye toward gener dreedl again to make sure hi plug had regist . “ now set your watch for nine-eighteen. ” colonel korn synchron their watch without a singl hitch and move ahead with confid . he gave the men the color of the day and review the weather condit with an agil , flashi versatil , cast sidelong , simper look at gener dreedl everi few second to draw increas encourag from the excel impress he saw he wa make . preen and prune himself effulgendi and strut vainglori about the platform as he pick up momentum , he gave the men the color of the day again and shift nimbl into a rous pep talk on the import of the bridg at avignon to the war effort and the oblig of each man on the mission to place love of countri abov love of life . when hi inspir dissert wa finish , he gave the men the color of the day still one more time , stress the angl of approach and review the weather condit again . colonel korn felt himself at the full height of hi power . he belong in the spotlight . comprehens dawn slowli on colonel cathcart ; when it came , he wa struck dumb . hi face grew longer and longer as he envious watch colonel korn ’ s treacheri continu , and he wa almost afraid to listen when gener dreedl move up besid him and , in a whisper blusteri enough to be heard throughout the room , demand , “ who is that man ? ” colonel cathcart answer with wan forebod , and gener dreedl then cup hi hand over hi mouth and whisper someth that made colonel cathcart ’ s face glow with immens joy . colonel korn saw and quiver with uncontain raptur . had he just been promot in the field by gener dreedl to full colonel ? he could not endur the suspens . with a master flourish , he brought the brief to a close and turn expectantli to receiv ardent congratul from gener dreedle-who wa alreadi stride out of the build without a glanc backward , trail hi nurs and colonel moodu behind him . colonel korn wa stun by thi disappoint sight , but onli for an instant . hi eye found colonel cathcart , who wa still stand erect in a grin tranc , and he rush over jubilantli and began pull on hi arm . “ what ’ d he say about me ? ” he demand excitedli in a fervor of proud and bliss anticip . “ what did gener dreedl say ? ” “ he want to know who you were. ” “ i know that . i know that . but what ’ d he say about me ? what ’ d he say ? ” “ you make him sick. ” 22 milo the mayor that wa the mission on which yossarian lost hi nerv . yossarian lost hi nerv on the mission to avignon becaus snowden lost hi gut , and snowden lost hi gut becaus their pilot that day wa hupl , who wa onli fifteen year old , and their co-pilot wa dobb , who wa even wors and who want yossarian to join with him in a plot to murder colonel cathcart . hupl wa a good pilot , yossarian knew , but he wa onli a kid , and dobb had no confid in him , either , and wrest the control away without warn after they had drop their bomb , go berserk in mid-air and tip the plane over into that heart-stop , ear-split , indescrib petrifi fatal dive that tore yossarian ’ s earphon free from their connect and hung him helplessli to the roof of the nose by the top of hi head . oh , god ! yossarian had shriek soundlessli as he felt them all fall . oh , god ! oh , god ! oh , god ! oh , god ! he had shriek beseechingli through lip that could not open as the plane fell and he dangl without weight by the top of hi head until hupl manag to seiz the control back and level the plane out down insid the crazi , craggi , patchwork canyon of crash antiaircraft fire from which they had climb away and from which they would now have to escap again . almost at onc there wa a thud and a hole the size of a big fist in the plexiglass . yossarian ’ s cheek were sting with shimmer splinter . there wa no blood . “ what happen ? what happen ? ” he cri , and trembl violent when he could not hear hi own voic in hi ear . he wa cow by the empti silenc on the intercom and almost too horrifi to move as he crouch like a trap mous on hi hand and knee and wait without dare to breath until he final spi the gleam cylindr jack plug of hi headset swing back and forth in front of hi eye and jam it back into it receptacl with finger that rattl . oh , god ! he kept shriek with no abat of terror as the flak thump and mushroom all about him . oh , god ! dobb wa weep when yossarian jam hi jack plug back into the intercom system and wa abl to hear again . “ help him , help him , ” dobb wa sob . “ help him , help him. ” “ help who ? help who ? ” yossarian call back . “ help who ? ” “ the bombardi , the bombardi , ” dobb cri . “ he doesn ’ t answer . help the bombardi , help the bombardier. ” “ i ’ m the bombardi , ” yossarian cri back at him . “ i ’ m the bombardi . i ’ m all right . i ’ m all right. ” “ then help him , help him , ” dobb wept . “ help him , help him. ” “ help who ? help who ? ” “ the radio-gunn , ” dobb beg . “ help the radio-gunner. ” “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden whimper feebli over the intercom system then in a bleat of plaintiv agoni . “ pleas help me . i ’ m cold. ” and yossarian crept out through the crawlway and climb up over the bomb bay and down into the rear section of the plane where snowden lay on the floor wound and freez to death in a yellow splash of sunlight near the new tail-gunn lie stretch out on the floor besid him in a dead faint . dobb wa the worst pilot in the world and knew it , a shatter wreck of a viril young man who wa continu strive to convinc hi superior that he wa no longer fit to pilot a plane . none of hi superior would listen , and it wa the day the number of mission wa rais to sixti that dobb stole into yossarian ’ s tent while orr wa out look for gasket and disclos the plot he had formul to murder colonel cathcart . he need yossarian ’ s assist . “ you want us to kill him in cold blood ? ” yossarian object . “ that ’ s right , ” dobb agre with an optimist smile , encourag by yossarian ’ s readi grasp of the situat . “ we ’ ll shoot him to death with the luger i brought back from sicili that nobodi know i ’ ve got. ” “ i don ’ t think i could do it , ” yossarian conclud , after weigh the idea in silenc awhil . dobb wa astonish . “ whi not ? ” “ look . noth would pleas me more than to have the son of a bitch break hi neck or get kill in a crash or to find out that someon els had shot him to death . but i don ’ t think i could kill him. ” “ he ’ d do it to you , ” dobb argu . “ in fact , you ’ re the one who told me he is do it to us by keep us in combat so long. ” “ but i don ’ t think i could do it to him . he ’ s got a right to live , too , i guess. ” “ not as long as he ’ s tri to rob you and me of our right to live . what ’ s the matter with you ? ” dobb wa flabbergast . “ i use to listen to you argu that same thing with cleving . and look what happen to him . right insid that cloud. ” “ stop shout , will you ? ” yossarian shush him . “ i ’ m not shout ! ” dobb shout louder , hi face red with revolutionari fervor . hi eye and nostril were run , and hi palpit crimson lower lip wa splatter with a foami dew . “ there must have been close to a hundr men in the group who had finish their fifty-f mission when he rais the number to sixti . there must have been at least anoth hundr like you with just a coupl more to fli . he ’ s go to kill us all if we let him go on forev . we ’ ve got to kill him first. ” yossarian nod expressionlessli , without commit himself . “ do you think we could get away with it ? ” “ i ’ ve got it all work out . i- “ “ stop shout , for christ ’ s sake ! ” “ i ’ m not shout . i ’ ve got it- “ “ will you stop shout ! ” “ i ’ ve got it all work out , ” dobb whisper , grip the side of orr ’ s cot with white-knuckl hand to constrain them from wave . “ thursday morn when he ’ s due back from that goddam farmhous of hi in the hill , i ’ ll sneak up through the wood to that hairpin turn in the road and hide in the bush . he ha to slow down there , and i can watch the road in both direct to make sure there ’ s no one els around . when i see him come , i ’ ll shove a big log out into the road to make him stop hi jeep . then i ’ ll step out of the bush with my luger and shoot him in the head until he ’ s dead . i ’ ll buri the gun , come back down through the wood to the squadron and go about my busi just like everybodi els . what could possibl go wrong ? ” yossarian had follow each step attent . “ where do i come in ? ” he ask in puzzlement . “ i couldn ’ t do it without you , ” dobb explain . “ i need you to tell me to go ahead. ” yossarian found it hard to believ him . “ is that all you want me to do ? just tell you to go ahead ? ” “ that ’ s all i need from you , ” dobb answer . “ just tell me to go ahead and i ’ ll blow hi brain out all by myself the day after tomorrow. ” hi voic wa acceler with emot and rise again . “ i ’ d like to shoot colonel korn in the head , too , while we ’ re at it , although i ’ d like to spare major danbi , if that ’ s all right with you . then i ’ d murder applebi and havermey also , and after we finish murder applebi and havermey i ’ d like to murder mcwatt. ” “ mcwatt ? ” cri yossarian , almost jump up in horror . “ mcwatt ’ s a friend of mine . what do you want from mcwatt ? ” “ i don ’ t know , ” dobb confess with an air of flounder embarrass . “ i just thought that as long as we were murder applebi and havermey we might as well murder mcwatt too . don ’ t you want to murder mcwatt ? ” yossarian took a firm stand . “ look , i might keep interest in thi if you stop shout it all over the island and if you stick to kill colonel cathcart . but if you ’ re go to turn thi into a blood bath , you can forget about me. ” “ all right , all right , ” dobb sought to placat him . “ just colonel cathcart . should i do it ? tell me to go ahead. ” yossarian shook hi head . “ i don ’ t think i could tell you to go ahead. ” dobb wa frantic . “ i ’ m will to compromis , ” he plead vehement . “ you don ’ t have to tell me to go ahead . just tell me it ’ s a good idea . okay ? is it a good idea ? ” yossarian still shook hi head . “ it would have been a great idea if you had gone ahead and done it without even speak to me . now it ’ s too late . i don ’ t think i can tell you anyth . give me some more time . i might chang my mind. ” “ then it will be too late. ” yossarian kept shake hi head . dobb wa disappoint . he sat for a moment with a hangdog look , then spurt to hi feet suddenli and stamp away to have anoth impetu crack at persuad doc daneeka to ground him , knock over yossarian ’ s washstand with hi hip when he lurch around and trip over the fuel line of the stove orr wa still construct . doc daneeka withstood dobb ’ s bluster and gesticul attack with a seri of impati nod and sent him to the medic tent to describ hi symptom to gu and we , who paint hi gum purpl with gentian-violet solut the moment he start to talk . they paint hi toe purpl , too , and forc a lax down hi throat when he open hi mouth again to complain , and then they sent him away . dobb wa in even wors shape than hungri joe , who could at least fli mission when he wa not have nightmar . dobb wa almost as bad as orr , who seem happi as an unders , grin lark with hi derang and galvan giggl and shiver warp buck teeth and who wa sent along for a rest leav with milo and yossarian on the trip to cairo for egg when milo bought cotton instead and took off at dawn for istanbul with hi plane pack to the gun turret with exot spider and unripen red banana . orr wa one of the homeliest freak yossarian had ever encount , and one of the most attract . he had a raw bulgi face , with hazel eye squeez from their socket like match brown halv of marbl and thick , wavi particolor hair slope up to a peak on the top of hi head like a pomad pup tent . orr wa knock down into the water or had an engin shot out almost everi time he went up , and he began jerk on yossarian ’ s arm like a wild man after they had taken off for napl and come down in sicili to find the scheme , cigar-smok , ten-year-old pimp with the two twelve-year-old virgin sister wait for them in town in front of the hotel in which there wa room for onli milo . yossarian pull back from orr adamantli , gaze with some concern and bewilder at mt . etna instead of mt . vesuviu and wonder what they were do in sicili instead of napl as orr kept entreat him in a titter , stutter , concupisc turmoil to go along with him behind the scheme ten-year-old pimp to hi two twelve-year-old virgin sister who were not realli virgin and not realli sister and who were realli onli twenty-eight . “ go with him , ” milo instruct yossarian lacon . “ rememb your mission. ” “ all right , ” yossarian yield with a sigh , rememb hi mission . “ but at least let me tri to find a hotel room first so i can get a good night ’ s sleep afterward. ” “ you ’ ll get a good night ’ s sleep with the girl , ” milo repli with the same air of intrigu . rememb your mission. ” but they got no sleep at all , for yossarian and orr found themselv jam into the same doubl bed with the two twelve-year-old twenty-eight-year-old prostitut , who turn out to be oili and obes and who kept wake them up all night long to ask them to switch partner . yossarian ’ s percept were soon so fuzzi that he paid no notic to the beig turban the fat one crowd into him kept wear until late the next morn when the scheme ten-year-old pimp with the cuban panatella snatch it off in public in a bestial capric that expos in the brilliant sicilian daylight her shock , misshapen and denud skull . veng neighbor had shave her hair to the gleam bone becaus she had slept with german . the girl screech in feminin outrag and waddl comic after the scheme ten-year-old pimp , her grisli , bleak , violat scalp slither up and down ludicr around the queer darken wart of her face like someth bleach and obscen . yossarian had never laid eye on anyth so bare befor . the pimp spun the turban high on hi finger like a trophi and kept himself skip inch ahead of her finger tip as he led her in a tantal circl around the squar congest with peopl who were howl with laughter and point to yossarian with deris when milo strode up with a grim look of hast and pucker hi lip reprovingli at the unseemli spectacl of so much vice and frivol . milo insist on leav at onc for malta . “ we ’ re sleepi , ” orr whine . “ that ’ s your own fault , ” milo censur them both selfright . “ if you had spent the night in your hotel room instead of with these immor girl , you ’ d both feel as good as i do today. ” “ you told us to go with them , ” yossarian retort accusingli . “ and we didn ’ t have a hotel room . you were the onli one who could get a hotel room. ” “ that wasn ’ t my fault , either , ” milo explain haughtili . “ how wa i suppos to know all the buyer would be in town for the chick-pea harvest ? ” “ you knew it , ” yossarian charg . “ that explain whi we ’ re here in sicili instead of napl . you ’ ve probabl got the whole damn plane fill with chick-pea already. ” “ shhhhhh ! ” milo caution sternli , with a meaning glanc toward orr . “ rememb your mission. ” the bomb bay , the rear and tail section of the plane and most of the top turret gunner ’ s section were all fill with bushel of chick-pea when they arriv at the airfield to take off for malta . yossarian ’ s mission on the trip wa to distract orr from observ where milo bought hi egg , even though orr wa a member of milo ’ s syndic and , like everi other member of milo ’ s syndic , own a share . hi mission wa silli , yossarian felt , sinc it wa common knowledg that milo bought hi egg in malta for seven cent apiec and sold them to the mess hall in hi syndic for five cent apiec . “ i just don ’ t trust him , ” milo brood in the plane , with a backward nod toward orr , who wa curl up like a tangl rope on the low bushel of chick-pea , tri torturedli to sleep . “ and i ’ d just as soon buy my egg when he ’ s not around to learn my busi secret . what els don ’ t you understand ? ” yossarian wa ride besid him in the co-pilot ’ s seat . “ i don ’ t understand whi you buy egg for seven cent apiec in malta and sell them for five cents. ” “ i do it to make a profit. ” “ but how can you make a profit ? you lose two cent an egg. ” “ but i make a profit of three and a quarter cent an egg by sell them for four and a quarter cent an egg to the peopl in malta i buy them from for seven cent an egg . of cours , i don ’ t make the profit . the syndic make the profit . and everybodi ha a share. ” yossarian felt he wa begin to understand . “ and the peopl you sell the egg to at four and a quarter cent apiec make a profit of two and three quarter cent apiec when they sell them back to you at seven cent apiec . is that right ? whi don ’ t you sell the egg directli to you and elimin the peopl you buy them from ? ” “ becaus i ’ m the peopl i buy them from , ” milo explain . “ i make a profit of three and a quarter cent apiec when i sell them to me and a profit of two and three quarter cent apiec when i buy them back from me . that ’ s a total profit of six cent an egg . i lose onli two cent an egg when i sell them to the mess hall at five cent apiec , and that ’ s how i can make a profit buy egg for seven cent apiec and sell them for five cent apiec . i pay onli one cent apiec at the hen when i buy them in sicily. ” “ in malta , ” yossarian correct . “ you buy your egg in malta , not sicily. ” milo chortl proudli . “ i don ’ t buy egg in malta , ” he confess , with an air of slight and clandestin amus that wa the onli departur from industri sobrieti yossarian had ever seen him make . “ i buy them in sicili for one cent apiec and transfer them to malta secretli at four and a half cent apiec in order to get the price of egg up to seven cent apiec when peopl come to malta look for them. ” “ whi do peopl come to malta for egg when they ’ re so expens there ? ” “ becaus they ’ ve alway done it that way. ” “ whi don ’ t they look for egg in sicili ? ” “ becaus they ’ ve never done it that way. ” “ now i realli don ’ t understand . whi don ’ t you sell your mess hall the egg for seven cent apiec instead offer five cent apiec ? ” “ becaus my mess hall would have no need for me then . anyon can buy seven-cents-apiec egg for seven cent apiece. ” “ whi don ’ t they bypass you and buy the egg directli from you in malta at four and a quarter cent apiec ? ” “ becaus i wouldn ’ t sell it to them. ” “ whi wouldn ’ t you sell it to them ? ” “ becaus then there wouldn ’ t be as much room for profit . at least thi way i can make a bit for myself as a middleman. ” “ then you do make a profit for yourself , ” yossarian declar . “ of cours i do . but it all goe to the syndic . and everybodi ha a share . don ’ t you understand ? it ’ s exactli what happen with those plum tomato i sell to colonel cathcart. ” “ buy , ” yossarian correct him . “ you don ’ t sell plum tomato to colonel cathcart and colonel korn . you buy plum tomato from them. ” “ no , sell , ” milo correct yossarian . “ i distribut my plum tomato in market all over pianosa under an assum name so that colonel cathcart and colonel korn can buy them up from me under their assum name at four cent apiec and sell them back to me the next day for the syndic at five cent apiec . they make a profit of one cent apiec . i make a profit of three and a half cent apiec , and everybodi come out ahead. ” “ everybodi but the syndic , ” said yossarian with a snort . “ the syndic is pay five cent apiec for plum tomato that cost you onli half a cent apiec . how doe the syndic benefit ? ” “ the syndic benefit when i benefit , ” milo explain , “ becaus everybodi ha a share . and the syndic get colonel cathcart ’ s and colonel korn ’ s support so that they ’ ll let me go out on trip like thi one . you ’ ll see how much profit that can mean in about fifteen minut when we land in palermo. ” “ malta , ” yossarian correct him . “ we ’ re fli to malta now , not palermo. ” “ no , we ’ re fli to palermo , ” milo answer . “ there ’ s an endiv export in palermo i have to see for a minut about a shipment of mushroom to bern that were damag by mold. ” “ milo , how do you do it ? ” yossarian inquir with laugh amaz and admir . “ you fill out a flight plan for one place and then you go to anoth . don ’ t the peopl in the control tower ever rais hell ? ” “ they all belong to the syndic , ” milo said . “ and they know that what ’ s good for the syndic is good for the countri , becaus that ’ s what make sammi run . the men in the control tower have a share , too , and that ’ s whi they alway have to do whatev they can to help the syndicate. ” “ do i have a share ? ” “ everybodi ha a share. ” “ doe orr have a share ? ” “ everybodi ha a share. ” “ and hungri joe ? he ha a share , too ? ” “ everybodi ha a share. ” “ well , i ’ ll be damn , ” muse yossarian , deepli impress with the idea of a share for the veri first time . milo turn toward him with a faint glimmer of mischief . “ i have a sure-fir plan for cheat the feder govern out of six thousand dollar . we can make three thousand dollar apiec without ani risk to either of us . are you interest ? ” “ no. ” milo look at yossarian with profound emot . “ that ’ s what i like about you , ” he exclaim . “ you ’ re honest ! you ’ re the onli one i know that i can realli trust . that ’ s whi i wish you ’ d tri to be of more help to me . i realli wa disappoint when you ran off with those two tramp in catania yesterday. ” yossarian stare at milo in quizzic disbelief . “ milo , you told me to go with them . don ’ t you rememb ? ” “ that wasn ’ t my fault , ” milo answer with digniti . “ i had to get rid of orr some way onc we reach town . it will be a lot differ in palermo . when we land in palermo , i want you and orr to leav with the girl right from the airport. ” “ with what girl ? ” “ i radio ahead and made arrang with a four-year-old pimp to suppli you and orr with two eight-year-old virgin who are half spanish . he ’ ll be wait at the airport in a limousin . go right in as soon as you step out of the plane. ” “ noth do , ” said yossarian , shake hi head . “ the onli place i ’ m go is to sleep. ” milo turn livid with indign , hi slim long nose flicker spasmod between hi black eyebrow and hi unbalanc orange-brown mustach like the pale , thin flame of a singl candl . “ yossarian , rememb your mission , ” he remind rever . “ to hell with my mission , ” yossarian respond indiffer . “ and to hell with the syndic too , even though i do have a share . i don ’ t want ani eight-year-old virgin , even if they are half spanish. ” “ i don ’ t blame you . but these eight-year-old virgin are realli onli thirty-two . and they ’ re not realli half spanish but onli one-third estonian. ” “ i don ’ t care for ani virgins. ” “ and they ’ re not even virgin , ” milo continu persuas . “ the one i pick out for you wa marri for a short time to an elderli schoolteach who slept with her onli on sunday , so she ’ s realli almost as good as new. ” but orr wa sleepi , too , and yossarian and orr were both at milo ’ s side when they rode into the citi of palermo from the airport and discov that there wa no room for the two of them at the hotel there either , and , more import , that milo wa mayor . the weird , implaus recept for milo began at the airfield , where civilian labor who recogn him halt in their duti respect to gaze at him with full express of control exuber and adul . new of hi arriv preced him into the citi , and the outskirt were alreadi crowd with cheer citizen as they sped by in their small uncov truck . yossarian and orr were mystifi and mute and press close against milo for secur . insid the citi , the welcom for milo grew louder as the truck slow and eas deeper toward the middl of town . small boy and girl had been releas from school and were line the sidewalk in new cloth , wave tini flag . yossarian and orr were absolut speechless now . the street were jam with joyou throng , and strung overhead were huge banner bear milo ’ s pictur . milo had pose for these pictur in a drab peasant ’ s blous with a high collar , and hi scrupul , patern counten wa toler , wise , critic and strong as he stare out at the populac omnisci with hi undisciplin mustach and disunit eye . sink invalid blew kiss to him from window . apron shopkeep cheer ecstat from the narrow doorway of their shop . tuba crump . here and there a person fell and wa trampl to death . sob old women swarm through each other frantic around the slow-mov truck to touch milo ’ s shoulder or press hi hand . milo bore the tumultu celebr with benevol grace . he wave back to everyon in eleg reciproc and shower gener hand of foilcov hershey kiss to the rejoic multitud . line of lusti young boy and girl skip along behind him with their arm link , chant in hoars and glassy-ey ador , “ milo ! mi-lo ! mi-lo ! ” now that hi secret wa out , milo relax with yossarian and orr and inflat opul with a vast , shi pride . hi cheek turn flesh-color . milo had been elect mayor of palermo-and of nearbi carini , monreal , bagheria , termini imeres , cefalu , mistretta and nicosia as well-becaus he had brought scotch to sicili . yossarian wa amaz . “ the peopl here like to drink scotch that much ? ” “ they don ’ t drink ani of the scotch , ” milo explain . “ scotch is veri expens , and these peopl here are veri poor. ” “ then whi do you import it to sicili if nobodi drink ani ? ” “ to build up a price . i move the scotch here from malta to make more room for profit when i sell it back to me for somebodi els . i creat a whole new industri here . today sicili is the third largest export of scotch in the world , and that ’ s whi they elect me mayor. ” “ how about get us a hotel room if you ’ re such a hotshot ? ” orr grumbl impertin in a voic slur with fatigu . milo respond contrit . “ that ’ s just what i ’ m go to do , ” he promis . “ i ’ m realli sorri about forget to radio ahead for hotel room for you two . come along to my offic and i ’ ll speak to my deputi mayor about it right now. ” milo ’ s offic wa a barbershop , and hi deputi mayor wa a pudgi barber from whose obsequi lip cordial greet foam as effus as the lather he began whip up in milo ’ s shave cup . “ well , vittorio , ” said milo , settl back lazili in one of vittorio ’ s barber chair , “ how were thing in my absenc thi time ? ” “ veri sad , signor milo , veri sad . but now that you are back , the peopl are all happi again. ” “ i wa wonder about the size of the crowd . how come all the hotel are full ? ” “ becaus so mani peopl from other citi are here to see you , signor milo . and becaus we have all the buyer who have come into town for the artichok auction. ” milo ’ s hand soar up perpendicularli like an eagl and arrest vittorio ’ s shave brush . “ what ’ s artichok ? ” he inquir . “ artichok , signor milo ? an artichok is a veri tasti veget that is popular everywher . you must tri some artichok while you are here , signor milo . we grow the best in the world. ” “ realli ? ” said milo . “ how much are artichok sell for thi year ? ” “ it look like a veri good year for artichok . the crop were veri bad. ” “ is that a fact ? ” muse milo , and wa gone , slide from hi chair so swiftli that hi stripe barber ’ s apron retain hi shape for a second or two after he had gone befor it collaps . milo had vanish from sight by the time yossarian and orr rush after him to the doorway . “ next ? ” bark milo ’ s deputi mayor offici . “ who ’ s next ? ” yossarian and orr walk from the barbershop in deject . desert by milo , they trudg homelessli through the revel mass in futil search of a place to sleep . yossarian wa exhaust . hi head throb with a dull , debilit pain , and he wa irrit with orr , who had found two crab appl somewher and walk with them in hi cheek until yossarian spi them there and made him take them out . then orr found two hors chestnut somewher and slip those in until yossarian detect them and snap at him again to take the crab appl out of hi mouth . orr grin and repli that they were not crab appl but hors chestnut and that they were not in hi mouth but in hi hand , but yossarian wa not abl to understand a singl word he said becaus of the hors chestnut in hi mouth and made him take them out anyway . a sli light twinkl in orr ’ s eye . he rub hi forehead harshli with hi knuckl , like a man in an alcohol stupor , and snicker lewdli . “ do you rememb that girl- “ he broke off to snicker lewdli again . “ do you rememb that girl who wa hit me over the head with that shoe in that apart in rome , when we were both nake ? ” he ask with a look of cun expect . he wait until yossarian nod cautious . “ if you let me put the chestnut back in my mouth i ’ ll tell you whi she wa hit me . is that a deal ? ” yossarian nod , and orr told him the whole fantast stori of whi the nake girl in nate ’ s whore ’ s apart wa hit him over the head with her shoe , but yossarian wa not abl to understand a singl word becaus the hors chestnut were back in hi mouth . yossarian roar with exasper laughter at the trick , but in the end there wa noth for them to do when night fell but eat a damp dinner in a dirti restaur and hitch a ride back to the airfield , where they slept on the chill metal floor of the plane and turn and toss in groan torment until the truck driver blast up less than two hour later with their crate of artichok and chase them out onto the ground while they fill up the plane . a heavi rain began fall . yossarian and orr were drip wet by the time the truck drove away and had no choic but to squeez themselv back into the plane and roll themselv up like shiver anchovi between the jolt corner of the crate of artichok that milo flew up to napl at dawn and exchang for the cinnamon stick , clove , vanilla bean and pepper pod that he rush right back down south with that same day to malta , where , it turn out , he wa assist governor-gener . there wa no room for yossarian and orr in malta either . milo wa major sir milo minderbind in malta and had a gigant offic in the governor-gener ’ s build . hi mahogani desk wa immens . in a panel of the oak wall , between cross british flag , hung a dramat arrest photograph of major sir milo minderbind in the dress uniform of the royal welsh fusili . hi mustach in the photograph wa clip and narrow , hi chin wa chisel , and hi eye were sharp as thorn . milo had been knight , commiss a major in the royal welsh fusili and name assist governor-gener of malta becaus he had brought the egg trade there . he gave yossarian and orr gener permiss to spend the night on the thick carpet in hi offic , but shortli after he left a sentri in battl dress appear and drove them from the build at the tip of hi bayonet , and they rode out exhaustedli to the airport with a surli cab driver , who overcharg them , and went to sleep insid the plane again , which wa fill now with leak gunni sack of cocoa and freshli ground coffe and reek with an odor so rich that they were both outsid retch violent against the land gear when milo wa chauffeur up the first thing the next morn , look fit as a fiddl , and took right off for oran , where there wa again no room at the hotel for yossarian and orr , and where milo wa vice-shah . milo had at hi dispos sumptuou quarter insid a salmon-pink palac , but yossarian and orr were not allow to accompani him insid becaus they were christian infidel . they were stop at the gate by gargantuan berber guard with scimitar and chase away . orr wa snuffl and sneez with a crippl head cold . yossarian ’ s broad back wa bent and ach . he wa readi to break milo ’ s neck , but milo wa vice-shah of oran and hi person wa sacr . milo wa not onli the vice-shah of oran , as it turn out , but also the caliph of baghdad , the imam of damascu , and the sheik of arabi . milo wa the corn god , the rain god and the rice god in backward region where such crude god were still worship by ignor and superstiti peopl , and deep insid the jungl of africa , he intim with becom modesti , larg graven imag of hi mustach face could be found overlook primit stone altar red with human blood . everywher they touch he wa acclaim with honor , and it wa one triumphal ovat after anoth for him in citi after citi until they final doubl back through the middl east and reach cairo , where milo corner the market on cotton that no one els in the world want and brought himself promptli to the brink of ruin . in cairo there wa at last room at the hotel for yossarian and orr . there were soft bed for them with fat fluffed-up pillow and clean , crisp sheet . there were closet with hanger for their cloth . there wa water to wash with . yossarian and orr soak their rancid , unfriendli bodi pink in a steaming-hot tub and then went from the hotel with milo to eat shrimp cocktail and filet mignon in a veri fine restaur with a stock ticker in the lobbi that happen to be click out the latest quotat for egyptian cotton when milo inquir of the captain of waiter what kind of machin it wa . milo had never imagin a machin so beauti as a stock ticker befor . “ realli ? ” he exclaim when the captain of waiter had finish hi explan . “ and how much is egyptian cotton sell for ? ” the captain of waiter told him , and milo bought the whole crop . but yossarian wa not nearli so frighten by the egyptian cotton milo bought as he wa by the bunch of green red banana milo had spot in the nativ market place as they drove into the citi , and hi fear prove justifi , for milo shook him awak out of a deep sleep just after twelv and shove a partli peel banana toward him . yossarian choke back a sob . “ tast it , ” milo urg , follow yossarian ’ s writh face around with the banana insist . “ milo , you bastard , ” moan yossarian , “ i ’ ve got to get some sleep. ” “ eat it and tell me if it ’ s good , ” milo persev . “ don ’ t tell orr i gave it to you . i charg him two piaster for his. ” yossarian ate the banana submiss and close hi eye after tell milo it wa good , but milo shook him awak again and instruct him to get dress as quickli as he could , becaus they were leav at onc for pianosa . “ you and orr have to load the banana into the plane right away , ” he explain . “ the man said to watch out for spider while you ’ re handl the bunches. ” “ milo , can ’ t we wait until morn ? ” yossarian plead . “ i ’ ve got to get some sleep. ” “ they ’ re ripen veri quickli , ” answer milo , “ and we don ’ t have a minut to lose . just think how happi the men back at the squadron will be when they get these bananas. ” but the men back at the squadron never even saw ani of the banana , for it wa a seller ’ s market for banana in istanbul and a buyer ’ s market in beirut for the caraway seed milo rush with to bengasi after sell the banana , and when they race back into pianosa breathlessli six day later at the conclus of orr ’ s rest leav , it wa with a load of best white egg from sicili that milo said were from egypt and sold to hi mess hall for onli four cent apiec so that all the command offic in hi syndic would implor him to speed right back to cairo for more bunch of green red banana to sell in turkey for the caraway seed in demand in bengasi . and everybodi had a share . 23 nate ’ s old man the onli one back in the squadron who did see ani of milo ’ s red banana wa aarfi , who pick up two from an influenti fratern brother of hi in the quartermast corp when the banana ripen and began stream into itali through normal black-market channel and who wa in the offic ’ s apart with yossarian the even nate final found hi whore again after so mani fruitless week of mourn search and lure her back to the apart with two girl friend by promis them thirti dollar each . “ thirti dollar each ? ” remark aarfi slowli , poke and pat each of the three strap girl skeptic with the air of a grudg connoisseur . “ thirti dollar is a lot of money for piec like these . besid , i never paid for it in my life. ” “ i ’ m not ask you to pay for it , ” nate assur him quickli . “ i ’ ll pay for them all . i just want you guy to take the other two . won ’ t you help me out ? ” aarfi smirk complac and shook hi soft round head . “ nobodi ha to pay for it for good old aarfi . i can get all i want ani time i want it . i ’ m just not in the mood right now. ” “ whi don ’ t you just pay all three and send the other two away ? ” yossarian suggest . “ becaus then mine will be angri with me for make her work for her money , ” nate repli with an anxiou look at hi girl , who wa glower at him restlessli and start to mutter . “ she say that if i realli like her i ’ d send her away and go to bed with one of the others. ” “ i have a better idea , ” boast aarfi . “ whi don ’ t we keep the three of them here until after the curfew and then threaten to push them out into the street to be arrest unless they give us all their money ? we can even threaten to push them out the window. ” “ aarfi ! ” nate wa aghast . “ i wa onli tri to help , ” said aarfi sheepishli . aarfi wa alway tri to help nate becaus nate ’ s father wa rich and promin and in an excel posit to help aarfi after the war . “ gee whiz , ” he defend himself querul . “ back in school we were alway do thing like that . i rememb one day we trick these two dumb high-school girl from town into the fratern hous and made them put out for all the fellow there who want them by threaten to call up their parent and say they were put out for us . we kept them trap in bed there for more than ten hour . we even smack their face a littl when they start to complain . then we took away their nickel and dime and chew gum and threw them out . boy , we use to have fun in that fratern hous , ” he recal peac , hi corpul cheek aglow with the jovial , rubicund warmth of nostalg recollect . “ we use to ostrac everyon , even each other. ” but aarfi wa no help to nate now as the girl nate had fallen so deepli in love with began swear at him sullenli with rise , menac resent . luckili , hungri joe burst in just then , and everyth wa all right again , except that dunbar stagger in drunk a minut later and began embrac one of the other giggl girl at onc . now there were four men and three girl , and the seven of them left aarfi in the apart and climb into a horse-drawn cab , which remain at the curb at a dead halt while the girl demand their money in advanc . nate gave them nineti dollar with a gallant flourish , after borrow twenti dollar from yossarian , thirty-f dollar from dunbar and seventeen dollar from hungri joe . the girl grew friendlier then and call an address to the driver , who drove them at a clop pace halfway across the citi into a section they had never visit befor and stop in front of an old , tall build on a dark street . the girl led them up four steep , veri long flight of creak wooden stair and guid them through a doorway into their own wonder and resplend tenement apart , which burgeon miracul with an infinit and prolifer flow of suppl young nake girl and contain the evil and debauch ugli old man who irrit nate constantli with hi caustic laughter and the cluck , proper old woman in the ash-gray woolen sweater who disapprov of everyth immor that occur there and tri her best to tidi up . the amaz place wa a fertil , seeth cornucopia of femal nippl and navel . at first , there were just their own three girl , in the dimly-lit , drab brown sit room that stood at the junctur of three murki hallway lead in separ direct to the distant recess of the strang and marvel bordello . the girl disrob at onc , paus in differ stage to point proudli to their garish underth and banter all the while with the gaunt and dissip old man with the shabbi long white hair and slovenli white unbutton shirt who sat cackl lascivi in a musti blue armchair almost in the exact center of the room and bade nate and hi companion welcom with a mirth and sardon formal . then the old woman trudg out to get a girl for hungri joe , dip her captiou head sadli , and return with two big-bosom beauti , one alreadi undress and the other in onli a transpar pink half slip that she wiggl out of while sit down . three more nake girl saunter in from a differ direct and remain to chat , then two other . four more girl pass through the room in an indol group , engross in convers ; three were barefoot and one wobbl peril on a pair of unbuckl silver danc shoe that did not seem to be her own . one more girl appear wear onli panti and sat down , bring the total congreg there in just a few minut to eleven , all but one of them complet uncloth . there wa bare flesh loung everywher , most of it plump , and hungri joe began to die . he stood stock still in rigid , catalept astonish while the girl ambl in and made themselv comfort . then he let out a pierc shriek suddenli and bolt toward the door in a headlong dash back toward the enlist men ’ s apart for hi camera , onli to be halt in hi track with anoth frantic shriek by the dread , freez premonit that thi whole love , lurid , rich and color pagan paradis would be snatch away from him irredeem if he were to let it out of hi sight for even an instant . he stop in the doorway and sputter , the wiri vein and tendon in hi face and neck pulsat violent . the old man watch him with victori merriment , sit in hi musti blue armchair like some satan and hedonist deiti on a throne , a stolen u.s. armi blanket wrap around hi spindli leg to ward off a chill . he laugh quietli , hi sunken , shrewd eye sparkl percept with a cynic and wanton enjoy . he had been drink . nate react on sight with bristl enmiti to thi wick , deprav and unpatriot old man who wa old enough to remind him of hi father and who made disparag joke about america . “ america , ” he said , “ will lose the war . and itali will win it. ” “ america is the strongest and most prosper nation on earth , ” nate inform him with lofti fervor and digniti . “ and the american fight man is second to none. ” “ exactli , ” agre the old man pleasantli , with a hint of taunt amus . “ itali , on the other hand , is one of the least prosper nation on earth . and the italian fight man is probabl second to all . and that ’ s exactli whi my countri is do so well in thi war while your countri is do so poorly. ” nate guffaw with surpris , then blush apologet for hi impolit . “ i ’ m sorri i laugh at you , ” he said sincer , and he continu in a tone of respect condescens . “ but itali wa occupi by the german and is now be occupi by us . you don ’ t call that do veri well , do you ? ” “ but of cours i do , ” exclaim the old man cheer . “ the german are be driven out , and we are still here . in a few year you will be gone , too , and we will still be here . you see , itali is realli a veri poor and weak countri , and that ’ s what make us so strong . italian soldier are not die ani more . but american and german soldier are . i call that do extrem well . ye , i am quit certain that itali will surviv thi war and still be in exist long after your own countri ha been destroyed. ” nate could scarc believ hi ear . he had never heard such shock blasphemi befor , and he wonder with instinct logic whi g-men did not appear to lock the traitor old man up . “ america is not go to be destroy ! ” he shout passion . “ never ? ” prod the old man softli . “ well… ” nate falter . the old man laugh indulg , hold in check a deeper , more explos delight . hi goad remain gentl . “ rome wa destroy , greec wa destroy , persia wa destroy , spain wa destroy . all great countri are destroy . whi not your ? how much longer do you realli think your own countri will last ? forev ? keep in mind that the earth itself is destin to be destroy by the sun in twenty-f million year or so. ” nate squirm uncomfort . “ well , forev is a long time , i guess. ” “ a million year ? ” persist the jeer old man with keen , sadist zest . “ a half million ? the frog is almost five hundr million year old . could you realli say with much certainti that america , with all it strength and prosper , with it fight man that is second to none , and with it standard of live that is the highest in the world , will last as long as… the frog ? ” nate want to smash hi leer face . he look about imploringli for help in defend hi countri ’ s futur against the obnoxi calumni of thi sli and sin assail . he wa disappoint . yossarian and dunbar were busi in a far corner paw orgiast at four or five frolicsom girl and six bottl of red wine , and hungri joe had long sinc tramp away down one of the mystic hallway , propel befor him like a raven despot as mani of the broadest-hip young prostitut as he could contain in hi frail wind-mil arm and cram into one doubl bed . nate felt himself at an embarrass loss . hi own girl sat sprawl out gracelessli on an overstuf sofa with an express of otios boredom . nate wa unnerv by her torpid indiffer to him , by the same sleepi and inert pois that he rememb so vivdli , so sweetli , and so miser from the first time she had seen him and ignor him at the pack penny-ant blackjack game in the live room of the enlist men ’ s apart . her lax mouth hung open in a perfect o , and god alon knew at what her glaze and smoki eye were stare in such brute apathi . the old man wait tranquilli , watch him with a discern smile that wa both scorn and sympathet . a lissom , blond , sinuou girl with love leg and honey-color skin laid herself out contentedli on the arm of the old man ’ s chair and began molest hi angular , pale , dissolut face languidli and coquettishli . nate stiffen with resent and hostil at the sight of such lecheri in a man so old . he turn away with a sink heart and wonder whi he simpli did not take hi own girl and go to bed . thi sordid , vultur , diabol old man remind nate of hi father becaus the two were noth at all alik . nate ’ s father wa a courtli white-hair gentleman who dress impecc ; thi old man wa an uncouth bum . nate ’ s father wa a sober , philosoph and respons man ; thi old man wa fickl and licenti . nate ’ s father wa discreet and cultur ; thi old man wa a boor . nate ’ s father believ in honor and knew the answer to everyth ; thi old man believ in noth and had onli question . nate ’ s father had a distinguish white mustach ; thi old man had no mustach at all . nate ’ s father-and everyon els ’ s father nate had ever met-wa dignifi , wise and vener ; thi old man wa utterli repel , and nate plung back into debat with him , determin to repudi hi vile logic and insinu with an ambiti vengeanc that would captur the attent of the bore , phlegmat girl he had fallen so intens in love with and win her admir forev . “ well , frankli , i don ’ t know how long america is go to last , ” he proceed dauntlessli . “ i suppos we can ’ t last forev if the world itself is go to be destroy someday . but i do know that we ’ re go to surviv and triumph for a long , long time. ” “ for how long ? ” mock the profan old man with a gleam of malici elat . “ not even as long as the frog ? ” “ much longer than you or me , ” nate blurt out lame . “ oh , is that all ! that won ’ t be veri much longer then , consid that you ’ re so gullibl and brave and that i am alreadi such an old , old man. ” “ how old are you ? ” nate ask , grow intrigu and charm with the old man in spite of himself . “ a hundr and seven. ” the old man chuckl heartili at nate ’ s look of chagrin . “ i see you don ’ t believ that either. ” “ i don ’ t believ anyth you tell me , ” nate repli , with a bash mitig smile . “ the onli thing i do believ is that america is go to win the war. ” “ you put so much stock in win war , ” the grubbi iniquit old man scof . “ the real trick lie in lose war , in know which war can be lost . itali ha been lose war for centuri , and just see how splendidli we ’ ve done nonetheless . franc win war and is in a continu state of crisi . germani lose and prosper . look at our own recent histori . itali won a war in ethiopia and promptli stumbl into seriou troubl . victori gave us such insan delus of grandeur that we help start a world war we hadn ’ t a chanc of win . but now that we are lose again , everyth ha taken a turn for the better , and we will certainli come out on top again if we succeed in be defeated. ” nate gape at him in undisguis befuddl . “ now i realli don ’ t understand what you ’ re say . you talk like a madman. ” “ but i live like a sane one . i wa a fascist when mussolini wa on top , and i am an anti-fascist now that he ha been depos . i wa fanat pro-german when the german were here to protect us against the american , and now that the american are here to protect us against the german i am fanat pro-american . i can assur you , my outrag young friend ” -the old man ’ s know , disdain eye shone even more effervesc as nate ’ s stutter dismay increased- “ that you and your countri will have a no more loyal partisan in itali than me-but onli as long as you remain in italy. ” “ but , ” nate cri out in disbelief , “ you ’ re a turncoat ! a time-serv ! a shame , unscrupul opportunist ! ” “ i am a hundr and seven year old , ” the old man remind him suav . “ don ’ t you have ani principl ? ” “ of cours not. ” “ no moral ? ” “ oh , i am a veri moral man , ” the villain old man assur him with satir serious , stroke the bare hip of a buxom black-hair girl with pretti dimpl who had stretch herself out seduct on the other arm of hi chair . he grin at nate sarcast as he sat between both nake girl in smug and threadbar splendor , with a sovereign hand on each . “ i can ’ t believ it , ” nate remark grudgingli , tri stubbornli not to watch him in relationship to the girl . “ i simpli can ’ t believ it. ” “ but it ’ s perfectli true . when the german march into the citi , i danc in the street like a youth ballerina and shout , ‘ heil hitler ! ’ until my lung were hoars . i even wave a small nazi flag that i snatch away from a beauti littl girl while her mother wa look the other way . when the german left the citi , i rush out to welcom the american with a bottl of excel brandi and a basket of flower . the brandi wa for myself , of cours , and the flower were to sprinkl upon our liber . there wa a veri stiff and stuffi old major ride in the first car , and i hit him squar in the eye with a red rose . a marvel shot ! you should have seen him wince. ” nate gasp and wa on hi feet with amaz , the blood drain from hi cheek . “ major -- de coverley ! ” he cri . “ do you know him ? ” inquir the old man with delight . “ what a charm coincid ! ” nate wa too astound even to hear him . “ so you ’ re the one who wound major -- de coverley ! ” he exclaim in horrifi indign . “ how could you do such a thing ? ” the fiendish old man wa unperturb . “ how could i resist , you mean . you should have seen the arrog old bore , sit there so sternli in that car like the almighti himself , with hi big , rigid head and hi foolish , solemn face . what a tempt target he made ! i got him in the eye with an american beauti rose . i thought that wa most appropri . don ’ t you ? ” “ that wa a terribl thing to do ! ” nate shout at him reproach . “ a viciou and crimin thing ! major -- de coverley is our squadron execut offic ! ” “ is he ? ” teas the unregener old man , pinch hi pointi jaw grave in a parodi of repent . “ in that case , you must give me credit for be imparti . when the german rode in , i almost stab a robust young oberleutn to death with a sprig of edelweiss. ” nate wa appal and bewild by the abomin old man ’ s inabl to perceiv the enorm of hi offenc . “ don ’ t you realiz what you ’ ve done ? ” he scold vehement . “ major -- de coverley is a nobl and wonder person , and everyon admir him. ” “ he ’ s a silli old fool who realli ha no right act like a silli young fool . where is he today ? dead ? ” nate answer softli with somber awe . “ nobodi know . he seem to have disappeared. ” “ you see ? imagin a man hi age risk what littl life he ha left for someth so absurd as a country. ” nate wa instantli up in arm again . “ there is noth so absurd about risk your life for your countri ! ” he declar . “ isn ’ t there ? ” ask the old man . “ what is a countri ? a countri is a piec of land surround on all side by boundari , usual unnatur . englishmen are die for england , american are die for america , german are die for germani , russian are die for russia . there are now fifti or sixti countri fight in thi war . sure so mani countri can ’ t all be worth die for. ” “ anyth worth live for , ” said nate , “ is worth die for. ” “ and anyth worth die for , ” answer the sacrilegi old man , “ is certainli worth live for . you know , you ’ re such a pure and naiv young man that i almost feel sorri for you . how old are you ? twenty-f ? twenty-six ? ” “ nineteen , ” said nate . “ i ’ ll be twenti in january. ” “ if you live. ” the old man shook hi head , wear , for a moment , the same touchi , medit frown of the fret and disapprov old woman . “ they are go to kill you if you don ’ t watch out , and i can see now that you are not go to watch out . whi don ’ t you use some sens and tri to be more like me ? you might live to be a hundr and seven , too. ” “ becaus it ’ s better to die on one ’ s feet than live on one ’ s knee , ” nate retort with triumphant and lofti convict . “ i guess you ’ ve heard that say before. ” “ ye , i certainli have , ” muse the treacher old man , smile again . “ but i ’ m afraid you have it backward . it is better to live on one ’ s feet than die on one ’ s knee . that is the way the say goes. ” “ are you sure ? ” nate ask with sober confus . “ it seem to make more sens my way. ” “ no , it make more sens my way . ask your friends. ” nate turn to ask hi friend and discov they had gone . yossarian and dunbar had both disappear . the old man roar with contemptu merriment at nate ’ s look of embarrass surpris . nate ’ s face darken with shame . he vacil helplessli for a few second and then spun himself around and fled insid the nearest of the hallway in search of yossarian and dunbar , hope to catch them in time and bring them back to the rescu with news of the remark clash between the old man and major -- de coverley . all the door in the hallway were shut . there wa light under none . it wa alreadi veri late . nate gave up hi search forlornli . there wa noth left for him to do , he realiz final , but get the girl he wa in love with and lie down with her somewher to make tender , courteou love to her and plan their futur togeth ; but she had gone off to bed , too , by the time he return to the sit room for her , and there wa noth left for him to do then but resum hi abort discuss with the loathsom old man , who rose from hi armchair with jest civil and excus himself for the night , abandon nate there with two bleary-ey girl who could not tell him into which room hi own whore had gone and who pad off to bed sever second later after tri in vain to interest him in themselv , leav him to sleep alon in the sit room on the small , lumpi sofa . nate wa a sensit , rich , good-look boy with dark hair , trust eye , and a pain in hi neck when he awok on the sofa earli the next morn and wonder dulli where he wa . hi natur wa invari gentl and polit . he had live for almost twenti year without trauma , tension , hate , or neurosi , which wa proof to yossarian of just how crazi he realli wa . hi childhood had been a pleasant , though disciplin , one . he got on well with hi brother and sister , and he did not hate hi mother and father , even though they had both been veri good to him . nate had been brought up to detest peopl like aarfi , whom hi mother character as climber , and peopl like milo , whom hi father character as pusher , but he had never learn how , sinc he had never been permit near them . as far as he could recal , hi home in philadelphia , new york , main , palm beach , southampton , london , deauvil , pari and the south of franc had alway been crowd onli with ladi and gentlemen who were not climber or pusher . nate ’ s mother , a descend of the new england thornton , wa a daughter of the american revolut . hi father wa a son of a bitch . “ alway rememb , ” hi mother had remind him frequent , “ that you are a nate . you are not a vanderbilt , whose fortun wa made by a vulgar tugboat captain , or a rockefel , whose wealth wa amass through unscrupul specul in crude petroleum ; or a reynold or duke , whose incom wa deriv from the sale to the unsuspect public of product contain cancer-caus resin and tar ; and you are certainli not an astor , whose famili , i believ , still let room . you are a nate , and the nate have never done anyth for their money. ” “ what your mother mean , son , ” interject hi father affabl one time with that flair for grace and econom express nate admir so much , “ is that old money is better than new money and that the newli rich are never to be esteem as highli as the newli poor . isn ’ t that correct , my dear ? ” nate ’ s father brim continu with sage and sophist counsel of that kind . he wa as ebulli and ruddi as mull claret , and nate like him a great deal , although he did not like mull claret . when war broke out , nate ’ s famili decid that he would enlist in the arm forc , sinc he wa too young to be place in the diplomat servic , and sinc hi father had it on excel author that russia wa go to collaps in a matter of week or month and that hitler , churchil , roosevelt , mussolini , gandhi , franco , peron and the emperor of japan would then all sign a peac treati and live togeth happili ever after . it wa nate ’ s father ’ s idea that he join the air corp , where he could train safe as a pilot while the russian capitul and the detail of the armistic were work out , and where , as an offic , he would associ onli with gentlemen . instead , he found himself with yossarian , dunbar and hungri joe in a whore hous in rome , poignantli in love with an indiffer girl there with whom he final did lie down the morn after the night he slept alon in the sit room , onli to be interrupt almost immedi by her incorrig kid sister , who came burst in without warn and hurl herself onto the bed jealous so that nate could embrac her , too . nate ’ s whore sprang up snarl to whack her angrili and jerk her to her feet by her hair . the twelve-year-old girl look to nate like a pluck chicken or like a twig with the bark peel off her sapl bodi embarrass everyon in her precoci attempt to imit her elder , and she wa alway be chase away to put cloth on and order out into the street to play in the fresh air with the other children . the two sister swore and spat at each other now savag , rais a fluent , deafen commot that brought a whole crowd of hilari spectat swarm into the room . nate gave up in exasper . he ask hi girl to get dress and took her downstair for breakfast . the kid sister tag along , and nate felt like the proud head of a famili as the three of them ate respect in a nearbi open-air café . but nate ’ s whore wa alreadi bore by the time they start back , and she decid to go streetwalk with two other girl rather than spend more time with him . nate and the kid sister follow meekli a block behind , the ambiti youngster to pick up valuabl pointer , nate to eat hi liver in moon frustrat , and both were sadden when the girl were stop by soldier in a staff car and driven away . nate went back to the café and bought the kid sister chocol ice cream until her spirit improv and then return with her to the apart , where yossarian and dunbar were flop out in the sit room with an exhaust hungri joe , who wa still wear on hi batter face the bliss , numb , triumphant smile with which he had limp into view from hi massiv harem that morn like a person with numer broken bone . the lecher and deprav old man wa delight with hungri joe ’ s split lip and black-and-blu eye . he greet nate warmli , still wear the same rumpl cloth of the even befor . nate wa profoundli upset by hi seedi and disreput appear , and whenev he came to the apart he wish that the corrupt , immor old man would put on a clean brook brother shirt , shave , comb hi hair , wear a tweed jacket , and grow a dapper white mustach so that nate would not have to suffer such confus shame each time he look at him and wa remind of hi father . 24 milo april had been the best month of all for milo . lilac bloom in april and fruit ripen on the vine . heartbeat quicken and old appetit were renew . in april a liveli iri gleam upon the burnish dove . april wa spring , and in the spring milo minderbind ’ s fanci had lightli turn to thought of tangerin . “ tangerin ? ” “ ye , sir. ” “ my men would love tangerin , ” admit the colonel in sardinia who command four squadron of b-26 . “ there ’ ll be all the tangerin they can eat that you ’ re abl to pay for with money from your mess fund , ” milo assur him . “ casaba melon ? ” “ are go for a song in damascus. ” “ i have a weak for casaba melon . i ’ ve alway had a weak for casaba melons. ” “ just lend me one plane from each squadron , just one plane , and you ’ ll have all the casaba you can eat that you ’ ve money to pay for. ” “ we buy from the syndic ? ” “ and everybodi ha a share. ” “ it ’ s amaz , posit amaz . how can you do it ? ” “ mass purchas power make the big differ . for exampl , bread veal cutlets. ” “ i ’ m not so crazi about bread veal cutlet , ” grumbl the skeptic b-25 command in the north of corsica . “ bread veal cutlet are veri nutriti , ” milo admonish him piousli . “ they contain egg yolk and bread crumb . and so are lamb chops. ” “ ah , lamb chop , ” echo the b-25 command . “ good lamb chop ? ” “ the best , ” said milo , “ that the black market ha to offer. ” “ babi lamb chop ? ” “ in the cutest littl pink paper panti you ever saw . are go for a song in portugal. ” “ i can ’ t send a plane to portug . i haven ’ t the authority. ” “ i can , onc you lend the plane to me . with a pilot to fli it . and don ’ t forget-y ’ ll get gener dreedle. ” “ will gener dreedl eat in my mess hall again ? ” “ like a pig , onc you start feed him my best white fresh egg fri in my pure creameri butter . there ’ ll be tangerin too , and casaba melon , honeydew , filet of dover sole , bake alaska , and cockl and mussels. ” “ and everybodi ha a share ? ” “ that , ” said milo , “ is the most beauti part of it. ” “ i don ’ t like it , ” growl the unco-op fighter-plan command , who didn ’ t like milo either . “ there ’ s an unco-op fighter-plan command up north who ’ s got it in for me , ” milo complain to gener dreedl . “ it take just one person to ruin the whole thing , and then you wouldn ’ t have your fresh egg fri in my pure creameri butter ani more. ” gener dreedl had the unco-op fighter-plan command transfer to the solomon island to dig grave and replac him with a senil colonel with bursiti and a crave for litchi nut who introduc milo to the b-17 gener on the mainland with a yearn for polish sausag . “ polish sausag is go for peanut in cracow , ” milo inform him . “ polish sausag , ” sigh the gener nostalg . “ you know , i ’ d give just about anyth for a good hunk of polish sausag . just about anything. ” “ you don ’ t have to give anyth . just give me one plane for each mess hall and a pilot who will do what he ’ s told . and a small down payment on your initi order as a token of good faith. ” “ but cracow is hundr of mile behind the enemi line . how will you get to the sausag ? ” “ there ’ s an intern polish sausag exchang in geneva . i ’ ll just fli the peanut into switzerland and exchang them for polish sausag at the open market rate . they ’ ll fli the peanut back to cracow and i ’ ll fli the polish sausag back to you . you buy onli as much polish sausag as you want through the syndic . there ’ ll be tangerin too , with onli a littl artifici color ad . and egg from malta and scotch from sicili . you ’ ll be pay the money to yourself when you buy from the syndic , sinc you ’ ll own a share , so you ’ ll realli be get everyth you buy for noth . doesn ’ t that make sens ? ” “ sheer geniu . how in the world did you ever think of it ? ” “ my name is milo minderbind . i am twenty-seven year old. ” milo minderbind ’ s plane flew in from everywher , the pursuit plane , bomber , and cargo ship stream into colonel cathcart ’ s field with pilot at the control who would do what they were told . the plane were decor with flamboy squadron emblem illustr such laudabl ideal as courag , might , justic , truth , liberti , love , honor and patriot that were paint out at onc by milo ’ s mechan with a doubl coat of flat white and replac in garish purpl with the stencil name m amp ; m enterpris , fine fruit and produc . the ‘ m amp ; m ’ in ‘ m amp ; m enterpris ’ stood for milo amp ; minderbind , and the amp ; wa insert , milo reveal candidli , to nullifi ani impress that the syndic wa a one-man oper . plane arriv for milo from airfield in itali , north africa and england , and from air transport command station in liberia , ascens island , cairo , and karachi . pursuit plane were trade for addit cargo ship or retain for emerg invoic duti and small-parcel servic ; truck and tank were procur from the ground forc and use for short-dist road haul . everybodi had a share , and men got fat and move about tame with toothpick in their greasi lip . milo supervis the whole expand oper by himself . deep otter-brown line of preoccup etch themselv perman into hi careworn face and gave him a harri look of sobrieti and mistrust . everybodi but yossarian thought milo wa a jerk , first for volunt for the job of mess offic and next for take it so serious . yossarian also thought that milo wa a jerk ; but he also knew that milo wa a geniu . one day milo flew away to england to pick up a load of turkish halvah and came fli back from madagascar lead four german bomber fill with yam , collard , mustard green and black-ey georgia pea . milo wa dumbfound when he step down to the ground and found a conting of arm m.p. wait to imprison the german pilot and confisc their plane . confisc ! the mere word wa anathema to him , and he storm back and forth in excori condemn , shake a pierc finger of rebuk in the guilt-ridden face of colonel cathcart , colonel korn and the poor battle-scar captain with the submachin gun who command the m.p. . “ is thi russia ? ” milo assail them incredul at the top of hi voic . “ confisc ? ” he shriek , as though he could not believ hi own ear . “ sinc when is it the polici of the american govern to confisc the privat properti of it citizen ? shame on you ! shame on all of you for even think such a horribl thought. ” “ but milo , ” major danbi interrupt timidli , “ we ’ re at war with germani , and those are german planes. ” “ they are no such thing ! ” milo retort furious . “ those plane belong to the syndic , and everybodi ha a share . confisc ? how can you possibl confisc your own privat properti ? confisc , inde ! i ’ ve never heard anyth so deprav in my whole life. ” and sure enough , milo wa right , for when they look , hi mechan had paint out the german swastika on the wing , tail and fuselag with doubl coat of flat white and stencil in the word m amp ; m enterpris , fine fruit and produc . right befor their eye he had transform hi syndic into an intern cartel . milo ’ s argosi of plenti now fill the air . plane pour in from norway , denmark , franc , germani , austria , itali , yugoslavia , romania , bulgaria , sweden , finland , poland-from everywher in europ , in fact , but russia , with whom milo refus to do busi . when everybodi who wa go to had sign up with m amp ; m enterpris , fine fruit and produc , milo creat a wholli own subsidiari , m amp ; m fanci pastri , and obtain more airplan and more money from the mess fund for scone and crumpet from the british isl , prune and chees danish from copenhagen , éclair , cream puff , napoleon and petit four from pari , reim and grenobl , kugelhopf , pumpernickel and pfefferkuchen from berlin , linzer and dobo torten from vienna , strudel from hungari and baklava from ankara . each morn milo sent plane aloft all over europ and north africa haul long red tow sign advertis the day ’ s special in larg squar letter : “ eyeround , 79¢… white , 21¢. ” he boost cash incom for the syndic by leas tow sign to pet milk , gain dog food , and noxzema . in a spirit of civic enterpris , he regularli allot a certain amount of free aerial advertis space to gener peckem for the propag of such messag in the public interest as neat count , hast make wast , and the famili that pray togeth stay togeth . milo purchas spot radio announc on axi salli ’ s and lord haw haw ’ s daili propaganda broadcast from berlin to keep thing move . busi boom on everi battlefront . milo ’ s plane were a familiar sight . they had freedom of passag everywher , and one day milo contract with the american militari author to bomb the german-held highway bridg at orvieto and with the german militari author to defend the highway bridg at orvieto with antiaircraft fire against hi own attack . hi fee for attack the bridg for america wa the total cost of the oper plu six per cent and hi fee from germani for defend the bridg wa the same cost-plus-six agreement augment by a merit bonu of a thousand dollar for everi american plane he shot down . the consumm of these deal repres an import victori for privat enterpris , he point out , sinc the armi of both countri were social institut . onc the contract were sign , there seem to be no point in use the resourc of the syndic to bomb and defend the bridg , inasmuch as both govern had ampl men and materi right there to do so and were perfectli happi to contribut them , and in the end milo realiz a fantast profit from both halv of hi project for do noth more than sign hi name twice . the arrang were fair to both side . sinc milo did have freedom of passag everywher , hi plane were abl to steal over in a sneak attack without alert the german antiaircraft gunner ; and sinc milo knew about the attack , he wa abl to alert the german antiaircraft gunner in suffici time for them to begin fire accur the moment the plane came into rang . it wa an ideal arrang for everyon but the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent , who wa kill over the target the day he arriv . “ i didn ’ t kill him ! ” milo kept repli passion to yossarian ’ s angri protest . “ i wasn ’ t even there that day , i tell you . do you think i wa down there on the ground fire an antiaircraft gun when the plane came over ? ” “ but you organ the whole thing , didn ’ t you ? ” yossarian shout back at him in the velvet dark cloak the path lead past the still vehicl of the motor pool to the open-air movi theater . “ and i didn ’ t organ anyth , ” milo answer indignantli , draw great agit sniff of air in through hi hiss , pale , twitch nose . “ the german have the bridg , and we were go to bomb it , whether i step into the pictur or not . i just saw a wonder opportun to make some profit out of the mission , and i took it . what ’ s so terribl about that ? ” “ what ’ s so terribl about it ? milo , a man in my tent wa kill on that mission befor he could even unpack hi bags. ” “ but i didn ’ t kill him. ” “ you got a thousand dollar extra for it. ” “ but i didn ’ t kill him . i wasn ’ t even there , i tell you . i wa in barcelona buy oliv oil and skinless and boneless sardin , and i ’ ve got the purchas order to prove it . and i didn ’ t get the thousand dollar . that thousand dollar went to the syndic , and everybodi got a share , even you. ” milo wa appeal to yossarian from the bottom of hi soul . “ look , i didn ’ t start thi war , yossarian , no matter what that lousi wintergreen is say . i ’ m just tri to put it on a businesslik basi . is anyth wrong with that ? you know , a thousand dollar ain ’ t such a bad price for a medium bomber and a crew . if i can persuad the german to pay me a thousand dollar for everi plane they shoot down , whi shouldn ’ t i take it ? ” “ becaus you ’ re deal with the enemi , that ’ s whi . can ’ t you understand that we ’ re fight a war ? peopl are die . look around you , for christ ’ s sake ! ” milo shook hi head with weari forbear . “ and the german are not our enemi , ” he declar . “ oh i know what you ’ re go to say . sure , we ’ re at war with them . but the german are also member in good stand of the syndic , and it ’ s my job to protect their right as sharehold . mayb they did start the war , and mayb they are kill million of peopl , but they pay their bill a lot more promptli than some alli of our i could name . don ’ t you understand that i have to respect the sanctiti of my contract with germani ? can ’ t you see it from my point of view ? ” “ no , ” yossarian rebuf him harshli . milo wa stung and made no effort to disguis hi wound feel . it wa a muggi , moonlit night fill with gnat , moth , and mosquito . milo lift hi arm suddenli and point toward the open-air theater , where the milki , dust-fil beam burst horizont from the projector slash a conelik swath in the black and drape in a fluoresc membran of light the audienc tilt on the seat there in hypnot sag , their face focus upward toward the alumin movi screen . milo ’ s eye were liquid with integr , and hi artless and uncorrupt face wa lustrou with a shine mixtur of sweat and insect repel . “ look at them , ” he exclaim in a voic choke with emot . “ they ’ re my friend , my countrymen , my comrad in arm . a fellow never had a better bunch of buddi . do you think i ’ d do a singl thing to harm them if i didn ’ t have to ? haven ’ t i got enough on my mind ? can ’ t you see how upset i am alreadi about all that cotton pile up on those pier in egypt ? ” milo ’ s voic splinter into fragment , and he clutch at yossarian ’ s shirt front as though drown . hi eye were throb visibl like brown caterpillar . “ yossarian , what am i go to do with so much cotton ? it ’ s all your fault for let me buy it. ” the cotton wa pile up on the pier in egypt , and nobodi want ani . milo had never dream that the nile valley could be so fertil or that there would be no market at all for the crop he had bought . the mess hall in hi syndic would not help ; they rose up in uncompromis rebellion against hi propos to tax them on a per capita basi in order to enabl each man to own hi own share of the egyptian cotton crop . even hi reliabl friend the german fail him in thi crisi : they prefer ersatz . milo ’ s mess hall would not even help him store the cotton , and hi wareh cost skyrocket and contribut to the devast drain upon hi cash reserv . the profit from the orvieto mission were suck away . he began write home for the money he had sent back in better day ; soon that wa almost gone . and new bale of cotton kept arriv on the wharv at alexandria everi day . each time he succeed in dump some on the world market for a loss it wa snap up by canni egyptian broker in the levant , who sold it back to him at the origin price , so that he wa realli wors off than befor . m amp ; m enterpris verg on collaps . milo curs himself hourli for hi monument greed and stupid in purchas the entir egyptian cotton crop , but a contract wa a contract and had to be honor , and one night , after a sumptuou even meal , all milo ’ s fighter and bomber took off , join in format directli overhead and began drop bomb on the group . he had land anoth contract with the german , thi time to bomb hi own outfit . milo ’ s plane separ in a well co-ordin attack and bomb the fuel stock and the ordnanc dump , the repair hangar and the b-25 bomber rest on the lollipop-shap hardstand at the field . hi crew spare the land strip and the mess hall so that they could land safe when their work wa done and enjoy a hot snack befor retir . they bomb with their land light on , sinc no one wa shoot back . they bomb all four squadron , the offic ’ club and the group headquart build . men bolt from their tent in sheer terror and did not know in which direct to turn . wound soon lay scream everywher . a cluster of fragment bomb explod in the yard of the offic ’ club and punch jag hole in the side of the wooden build and in the belli and back of a row of lieuten and captain stand at the bar . they doubl over in agoni and drop . the rest of the offic fled toward the two exit in panic and jam up the doorway like a dens , howl dam of human flesh as they shrank from go farther . colonel cathcart claw and elbow hi way through the unruli , bewild mass until he stood outsid by himself . he stare up at the sky in stark astonish and horror . milo ’ s plane , balloon seren in over the blossom treetop with their bomb bay door open and wing flap down and with their monstrou , bug-ey , blind , fierc flicker , eeri land light on , were the most apocalypt sight he had ever beheld . colonel cathcart let go a stricken gasp of dismay and hurl himself headlong into hi jeep , almost sob . he found the ga pedal and the ignit and sped toward the airfield as fast as the rock car would carri him , hi huge flabbi hand clench and bloodless on the wheel or blare hi horn tormentedli . onc he almost kill himself when he swerv with a banshe screech of tire to avoid plow into a bunch of men run crazili toward the hill in their underwear with their stun face down and their thin arm press high around their templ as puni shield . yellow , orang and red fire were burn on both side of the road . tent and tree were in flame , and milo ’ s plane kept come around intermin with their blink white land light on and their bomb bay door open . colonel cathcart almost turn the jeep over when he slam the brake on at the control tower . he leap from the car while it wa still skid danger and hurtl up the flight of step insid , where three men were busi at the instrument and the control . he bowl two of them asid in hi lung for the nickel-pl microphon , hi eye glitter wildli and hi beefi face contort with stress . he squeez the microphon in a bestial grip and began shout hyster at the top of hi voic . “ milo , you son of a bitch ! are you crazi ? what the hell are you do ? come down ! come down ! ” “ stop holler so much , will you ? ” answer milo , who wa stand there right besid him in the control tower with a microphon of hi own . “ i ’ m right here. ” milo look at him with reproof and turn back to hi work . “ veri good , men , veri good , ” he chant into hi microphon . “ but i see one suppli shed still stand . that will never do , purvis-i ’ ve spoken to you about that kind of shoddi work befor . now , you go right back there thi minut and tri it again . and thi time come in slowly… slowli . hast make wast , purvi . hast make wast . if i ’ ve told you that onc , i must have told you that a hundr time . hast make waste. ” the loudspeak overhead began squawk . “ milo , thi is alvin brown . i ’ ve finish drop my bomb . what should i do now ? ” “ strafe , ” said milo . “ strafe ? ” alvin brown wa shock . “ we have no choic , ” milo inform him resignedli . “ it ’ s in the contract. ” “ oh , okay , then , ” alvin brown acquiesc . “ in that case i ’ ll strafe. ” thi time milo had gone too far . bomb hi own men and plane wa more than even the most phlegmat observ could stomach , and it look like the end for him . high-rank govern offici pour in to investig . newspap inveigh against milo with glare headlin , and congressmen denounc the atroc in stentorian wrath and clamor for punish . mother with children in the servic organ into milit group and demand reveng . not one voic wa rais in hi defens . decent peopl everywher were affront , and milo wa all wash up until he open hi book to the public and disclos the tremend profit he had made . he could reimburs the govern for all the peopl and properti he had destroy and still have enough money left over to continu buy egyptian cotton . everybodi , of cours , own a share . and the sweetest part of the whole deal wa that there realli wa no need to reimburs the govern at all . “ in a democraci , the govern is the peopl , ” milo explain . “ we ’ re peopl , aren ’ t we ? so we might just as well keep the money and elimin the middleman . frankli , i ’ d like to see the govern get out of war altogeth and leav the whole field to privat industri . if we pay the govern everyth we owe it , we ’ ll onli be encourag govern control and discourag other individu from bomb their own men and plane . we ’ ll be take away their incentive. ” milo wa correct , of cours , as everyon soon agre but a few embitt misfit like doc daneeka , who sulk cantanker and mutter offens insinu about the moral of the whole ventur until milo mollifi him with a donat , in the name of the syndic , of a lightweight aluminum collaps garden chair that doc daneeka could fold up conveni and carri outsid hi tent each time chief white halfoat came insid hi tent and carri back insid hi tent each time chief white halfoat came out . doc daneeka had lost hi head dure milo ’ s bombard ; instead of run for cover , he had remain out in the open and perform hi duti , slither along the ground through shrapnel , strafe and incendiari bomb like a furtiv , wili lizard from casualti to casualti , administ tourniquet , morphin , splint and sulfanilamid with a dark and dole visag , never say one word more than he had to and read in each man ’ s blu wound a dread portent of hi own decay . he work himself relentlessli into exhaust befor the long night wa over and came down with a snife the next day that sent him hurri querul into the medic tent to have hi temperatur taken by gu and we and to obtain a mustard plaster and vapor . doc daneeka tend each moan man that night with the same glum and profound and introvert grief he show at the airfield the day of the avignon mission when yossarian climb down the few step of hi plane nake , in a state of utter shock , with snowden smear abundantli all over hi bare heel and toe , knee , arm and finger , and point insid wordlessli toward where the young radio-gunn lay freez to death on the floor besid the still younger tail-gunn who kept fall back into a dead faint each time he open hi eye and saw snowden die . doc daneeka drape a blanket around yossarian ’ s shoulder almost tenderli after snowden had been remov from the plane and carri into an ambul on a stretcher . he led yossarian toward hi jeep . mcwatt help , and the three drove in silenc to the squadron medic tent , where mcwatt and doc daneeka guid yossarian insid to a chair and wash snowden off him with cold wet ball of absorb cotton . doc daneeka gave him a pill and a shot that put him to sleep for twelv hour . when yossarian woke up and went to see him , doc daneeka gave him anoth pill and a shot that put him to sleep for anoth twelv hour . when yossarian woke up again and went to see him , doc daneeka made readi to give him anoth pill and a shot . “ how long are you go to keep give me those pill and shot ? ” yossarian ask him . “ until you feel better. ” “ i feel all right now. ” doc daneeka ’ s frail suntan forehead furrow with surpris . “ then whi don ’ t you put some cloth on ? whi are you walk around nake ? ” “ i don ’ t want to wear a uniform ani more. ” doc daneeka accept the explan and put away hi hypoderm syring . “ are you sure you feel all right ? ” “ i feel fine . i ’ m just a littl logi from all those pill and shot you ’ ve been give me. ” yossarian went about hi busi with no cloth on all the rest of that day and wa still nake late the next morn when milo , after hunt everywher els , final found him sit up a tree a small distanc in back of the quaint littl militari cemeteri at which snowden wa be buri . milo wa dress in hi customari busi attire-olive-drab trouser , a fresh olive-drab shirt and tie , with one silver first lieuten ’ s bar gleam on the collar , and a regul dress cap with a stiff leather bill . “ i ’ ve been look all over for you , ” milo call up to yossarian from the ground reproach . “ you should have look for me in thi tree , ” yossarian answer . “ i ’ ve been up here all morning. ” “ come on down and tast thi and tell me if it ’ s good . it ’ s veri important. ” yossarian shook hi head . he sat nude on the lowest limb of the tree and balanc himself with both hand grasp the bough directli abov . he refus to budg , and milo had no choic but to stretch both arm about the trunk in a distast hug and start climb . he struggl upward clumsili with loud grunt and wheez , and hi cloth were squash and crook by the time he pull himself up high enough to hook a leg over the limb and paus for breath . hi dress cap wa askew and in danger of fall . milo caught it just in time when it began slip . globul of perspir glisten like transpar pearl around hi mustach and swell like opaqu blister under hi eye . yossarian watch him impass . cautious milo work himself around in a half circl so that he could face yossarian . he unwrap tissu paper from someth soft , round and brown and hand it to yossarian . “ pleas tast thi and let me know what you think . i ’ d like to serv it to the men. ” “ what is it ? ” ask yossarian , and took a big bite . “ chocolate-cov cotton. ” yossarian gag convuls and spray hi big mouth of chocolate-cov cotton right into milo ’ s face . “ here , take it back ! ” he spout angrili . “ jesu christ ! have you gone crazi ? you didn ’ t even take the goddam seed out. ” “ give it a chanc , will you ? ” milo beg . “ it can ’ t be that bad . is it realli that bad ? ” “ it ’ s even worse. ” “ but i ’ ve got to make the mess hall feed it to the men. ” “ they ’ ll never be abl to swallow it. ” “ they ’ ve got to swallow it , ” milo ordain with dictatori grandeur , and almost broke hi neck when he let go with one arm to wave a righteou finger in the air . “ come on out here , ” yossarian invit him . “ you ’ ll be much safer , and you can see everything. ” grip the bough abov with both hand , milo began inch hi way out on the limb sideway with utmost care and apprehens . hi face wa rigid with tension , and he sigh with relief when he found himself seat secur besid yossarian . he stroke the tree affection . “ thi is a pretti good tree , ” he observ admiringli with proprietari gratitud . “ it ’ s the tree of life , ” yossarian answer , waggl hi toe , “ and of knowledg of good and evil , too. ” milo squint close at the bark and branch . “ no it isn ’ t , ” he repli . “ it ’ s a chestnut tree . i ought to know . i sell chestnuts. ” “ have it your way. ” they sat in the tree without talk for sever second , their leg dangl and their hand almost straight up on the bough abov , the one complet nude but for a pair of crepe-sol sandal , the other complet dress in a coars olive-drab woolen uniform with hi tie knot tight . milo studi yossarian diffid through the corner of hi eye , hesit tact . “ i want to ask you someth , ” he said at last . “ you don ’ t have ani cloth on . i don ’ t want to butt in or anyth , but i just want to know . whi aren ’ t you wear your uniform ? ” “ i don ’ t want to. ” milo nod rapidli like a sparrow peck . “ i see , i see , ” he state quickli with a look of vivid confus . “ i understand perfectli . i heard applebi and captain black say you had gone crazi , and i just want to find out. ” he hesit polit again , weigh hi next question . “ aren ’ t you ever go to put your uniform on again ? ” “ i don ’ t think so. ” milo nod with spuriou vim to indic he still understood and then sat silent , rumin grave with troubl misgiv . a scarlet-crest bird shot by below , brush sure dark wing against a quiver bush . yossarian and milo were cover in their bower by tissue-thin tier of slope green and larg surround by other gray chestnut tree and a silver spruce . the sun wa high overhead in a vast sapphire-blu sky bead with low , isol , puffi cloud of dri and immacul white . there wa no breez , and the leav about them hung motionless . the shade wa featheri . everyth wa at peac but milo , who straighten suddenli with a muffl cri and began point excitedli . “ look at that ! ” he exclaim in alarm . “ look at that ! that ’ s a funer go on down there . that look like the cemeteri . isn ’ t it ? ” yossarian answer him slowli in a level voic . “ they ’ re buri that kid who got kill in my plane over avignon the other day . snowden. ” “ what happen to him ? ” milo ask in a voic deaden with awe . “ he got killed. ” “ that ’ s terribl , ” milo griev , and hi larg brown eye fill with tear . “ that poor kid . it realli is terrible. ” he bit hi trembl lip hard , and hi voic rose with emot when he continu . “ and it will get even wors if the mess hall don ’ t agre to buy my cotton . yossarian , what ’ s the matter with them ? don ’ t they realiz it ’ s their syndic ? don ’ t they know they ’ ve all got a share ? ” “ did the dead man in my tent have a share ? ” yossarian demand caustic . “ of cours he did , ” milo assur him lavishli . “ everybodi in the squadron ha a share. ” “ he wa kill befor he even got into the squadron. ” milo made a deft grimac of tribul and turn away . “ i wish you ’ d stop pick on me about that dead man in your tent , ” he plead peevishli . “ i told you i didn ’ t have anyth to do with kill him . is it my fault that i saw thi great opportun to corner the market on egyptian cotton and got us into all thi troubl ? wa i suppos to know there wa go to be a glut ? i didn ’ t even know what a glut wa in those day . an opportun to corner a market doesn ’ t come along veri often , and i wa pretti shrewd to grab the chanc when i had it. ” milo gulp back a moan as he saw six uniform pallbear lift the plain pine coffin from the ambul and set it gentli down on the ground besid the yawn gash of the freshli dug grave . “ and now i can ’ t get rid of a singl penni ’ s worth , ” he mourn . yossarian wa unmov by the fustian charad of the burial ceremoni , and by milo ’ s crush bereav . the chaplain ’ s voic float up to him through the distanc tenuous in an unintellig , almost inaud monoton , like a gaseou murmur . yossarian could make out major major by hi tower and lanki aloof and thought he recogn major danbi mop hi brow with a handkerchief . major danbi had not stop shake sinc hi run-in with gener dreedl . there were strand of enlist men mold in a curv around the three offic , as inflex as lump of wood , and four idl gravedigg in streak fatigu loung indiffer on spade near the shock , incongru heap of loos copper earth . as yossarian stare , the chaplain elev hi gaze toward yossarian beatif , press hi finger down over hi eyebal in a manner of afflict , peer upward again toward yossarian searchingli , and bow hi head , conclud what yossarian took to be a climact part of the funer rite . the four men in fatigu lift the coffin on sling and lower it into the grave . milo shudder violent . “ i can ’ t watch it , ” he cri , turn away in anguish . “ i just can ’ t sit here and watch while those mess hall let my syndic die. ” he gnash hi teeth and shook hi head with bitter woe and resent . “ if they had ani loyalti , they would buy my cotton till it hurt so that they can keep right on buy my cotton till it hurt them some more . they would build fire and burn up their underwear and summer uniform just to creat bigger demand . but they won ’ t do a thing . yossarian , tri eat the rest of thi chocolate-cov cotton for me . mayb it will tast delici now. ” yossarian push hi hand away . “ give up , milo . peopl can ’ t eat cotton. ” milo ’ s face narrow cunningli . “ it isn ’ t realli cotton , ” he coax . “ i wa joke . it ’ s realli cotton candi , delici cotton candi . tri it and see. ” “ now you ’ re lying. ” “ i never lie ! ” milo rejoind with proud digniti . “ you ’ re lie now. ” “ i onli lie when it ’ s necessari , ” milo explain defens , avert hi eye for a moment and blink hi lash winningli . “ thi stuff is better than cotton candi , realli it is . it ’ s made out of real cotton . yossarian , you ’ ve got to help me make the men eat it . egyptian cotton is the finest cotton in the world. ” “ but it ’ s indigest , ” yossarian emphas . “ it will make them sick , don ’ t you understand ? whi don ’ t you tri live on it yourself if you don ’ t believ me ? ” “ i did tri , ” admit milo gloomili . “ and it made me sick. ” the graveyard wa yellow as hay and green as cook cabbag . in a littl while the chaplain step back , and the beig crescent of human form began to break up sluggishli , like flotsam . the men drift without hast or sound to the vehicl park along the side of the bumpi dirt road . with their head down disconsol , the chaplain , major major and major danbi move toward their jeep in an ostrac group , each hold himself friendlessli sever feet away from the other two . “ it ’ s all over , ” observ yossarian . “ it ’ s the end , ” milo agre despond . “ there ’ s no hope left . and all becaus i left them free to make their own decis . that should teach me a lesson about disciplin the next time i tri someth like this. ” “ whi don ’ t you sell your cotton to the govern ? ” yossarian suggest casual , as he watch the four men in streak fatigu shovel heap blade of the copper-r earth back down insid the grave . milo veto the idea brusqu . “ it ’ s a matter of principl , ” he explain firmli . “ the govern ha no busi in busi , and i would be the last person in the world to ever tri to involv the govern in a busi of mine . but the busi of govern is busi , ” he rememb alertli , and continu with elat . “ calvin coolidg said that , and calvin coolidg wa a presid , so it must be true . and the govern doe have the respons of buy all the egyptian cotton i ’ ve got that no one els want so that i can make a profit , doesn ’ t it ? ” milo ’ s face cloud almost as abruptli , and hi spirit descend into a state of sad anxieti . “ but how will i get the govern to do it ? ” “ bribe it , ” yossarian said . “ bribe it ! ” milo wa outrag and almost lost hi balanc and broke hi neck again . “ shame on you ! ” he scold sever , breath virtuou fire down and upward into hi rusti mustach through hi billow nostril and prim lip . “ briberi is against the law , and you know it . but it ’ s not against the law to make a profit , is it ? so it can ’ t be against the law for me to bribe someon in order to make a fair profit , can it ? no , of cours not ! ” he fell to brood again , with a meek , almost pitiabl distress . “ but how will i know who to bribe ? ” “ oh , don ’ t you worri about that , ” yossarian comfort him with a toneless snicker as the engin of the jeep and ambul fractur the drowsi silenc and the vehicl in the rear began drive away backward . “ you make the bribe big enough and they ’ ll find you . just make sure you do everyth right out in the open . let everyon know exactli what you want and how much you ’ re will to pay for it . the first time you act guilti or asham , you might get into trouble. ” “ i wish you ’ d come with me , ” milo remark . “ i won ’ t feel safe among peopl who take bribe . they ’ re no better than a bunch of crooks. ” “ you ’ ll be all right , ” yossarian assur him with confid . “ if you run into troubl , just tell everybodi that the secur of the countri requir a strong domest egyptian-cotton specul industry. ” “ it doe , ” milo inform him solemnli . “ a strong egyptian-cotton specul industri mean a much stronger america. ” “ of cours it doe . and if that doesn ’ t work , point out the great number of american famili that depend on it for income. ” “ a great mani american famili do depend on it for income. ” “ you see ? ” said yossarian . “ you ’ re much better at it than i am . you almost make it sound true. ” “ it is true , ” milo exclaim with a strong trace of old hauteur . “ that ’ s what i mean . you do it with just the right amount of conviction. ” “ you ’ re sure you won ’ t come with me ? ” yossarian shook hi head . milo wa impati to get start . he stuf the remaind of the chocolate-cov cotton ball into hi shirt pocket and edg hi way back gingerli along the branch to the smooth gray trunk . he threw thi arm about the trunk in a gener and awkward embrac and began shinni down , the side of hi leather-sol shoe slip constantli so that it seem mani time he would fall and injur himself . halfway down , he chang hi mind and climb back up . bit of tree bark stuck to hi mustach , and hi strain face wa flush with exert . “ i wish you ’ d put your uniform on instead of go around nake that way , ” he confid pensiv befor he climb back down again and hurri away . “ you might start a trend , and then i ’ ll never get rid of all thi goldarn cotton. ” 25 the chaplain it wa alreadi some time sinc the chaplain had first begun wonder what everyth wa all about . wa there a god ? how could he be sure ? be an anabaptist minist in the american armi wa difficult enough under the best of circumst ; without dogma , it wa almost intoler . peopl with loud voic frighten him . brave , aggress men of action like colonel cathcart left him feel helpless and alon . wherev he went in the armi , he wa a stranger . enlist men and offic did not conduct themselv with him as they conduct themselv with other enlist men and offic , and even other chaplain were not as friendli toward him as they were toward each other . in a world in which success wa the onli virtu , he had resign himself to failur . he wa pain awar that he lack the ecclesiast aplomb and savoir-fair that enabl so mani of hi colleagu in other faith and sect to get ahead . he wa just not equip to excel . he thought of himself as ugli and want daili to be home with hi wife . actual , the chaplain wa almost good-look , with a pleasant , sensit face as pale and brittl as sandston . hi mind wa open on everi subject . perhap he realli wa washington irv , and perhap he realli had been sign washington irv ’ s name to those letter he knew noth about . such laps of memori were not uncommon in medic annal , he knew . there wa no way of realli know anyth . he rememb veri distinctly-or wa under the impress he rememb veri distinctly-hi feel that he had met yossarian somewher befor the first time he had met yossarian lie in bed in the hospit . he rememb experienc the same disquiet sensat almost two week later when yossarian appear at hi tent to ask to be taken off combat duti . by that time , of cours , the chaplain had met yossarian somewher befor , in that odd , unorthodox ward in which everi patient seem delinqu but the unfortun patient cover from head to toe in white bandag and plaster who wa found dead one day with a thermomet in hi mouth . but the chaplain ’ s impress of a prior meet wa of some occas far more moment and occult than that , of a signific encount with yossarian in some remot , submerg and perhap even entir spiritu epoch in which he had made the ident , foredoom admiss that there wa noth , absolut noth , he could do to help him . doubt of such kind gnaw at the chaplain ’ s lean , suffer frame insati . wa there a singl true faith , or a life after death ? how mani angel could danc on the head of a pin , and with what matter did god occupi himself in all the infinit aeon befor the creation ? whi wa it necessari to put a protect seal on the brow of cain if there were no other peopl to protect him from ? did adam and eve produc daughter ? these were the great , complex question of ontolog that torment him . yet they never seem nearli as crucial to him as the question of kind and good manner . he wa pinch perspinngli in the epistemolog dilemma of the skeptic , unabl to accept solut to problem he wa unwil to dismiss as unsolv . he wa never without miseri , and never without hope . “ have you ever , ” he inquir hesitantli of yossarian that day in hi tent as yossarian sat hold in both hand the warm bottl of coca-cola with which the chaplain had been abl to solac him , “ been in a situat which you felt you had been in befor , even though you knew you were experienc it for the first time ? ” yossarian nod perfunctorili , and the chaplain ’ s breath quicken in anticip as he made readi to join hi will power with yossarian ’ s in a prodigi effort to rip away at last the volumin black fold shroud the etern mysteri of exist . “ do you have that feel now ? ” yossarian shook hi head and explain that déjà vu wa just a momentari infinitesim lag in the oper of two coactiv sensori nerv center that commonli function simultan . the chaplain scarc heard him . he wa disappoint , but not inclin to believ yossarian , for he had been given a sign , a secret , enigmat vision that he still lack the bold to divulg . there wa no mistak the awesom implic of the chaplain ’ s revel : it wa either an insight of divin origin or a hallucin ; he wa either bless or lose hi mind . both prospect fill him with equal fear and depress . it wa neither déjà vu , presqu vu nor jamai vu . it wa possibl that there were other vu of which he had never heard and that one of these other vu would explain succinctli the bafe phenomenon of which he had been both a wit and a part ; it wa even possibl that none of what he thought had taken place , realli had taken place , that he wa deal with an aberr of memori rather than of percept , that he never realli had thought he had seen , that hi impress now that he onc had thought so wa mere the illus of an illus , and that he wa onli now imagin that he had ever onc imagin see a nake man sit in a tree at the cemeteri . it wa obviou to the chaplain now that he wa not particularli well suit to hi work , and he often specul whether he might not be happier serv in some other branch of the servic , as a privat in the infantri or field artilleri , perhap , or even as a paratroop . he had no real friend . befor meet yossarian , there wa no one in the group with whom he felt at eas , and he wa hardli at eas with yossarian , whose frequent rash and insubordin outburst kept him almost constantli on edg and in an ambigu state of enjoy trepid . the chaplain felt safe when he wa at the offic ’ club with yossarian and dunbar , and even with just nate and mcwatt . when he sat with them he had no need to sit with anyon els ; hi problem of where to sit wa solv , and he wa protect against the undesir compani of all those fellow offic who invari welcom him with excess cordial when he approach and wait uncomfort for him to go away . he made so mani peopl uneasi . everyon wa alway veri friendli toward him , and no one wa ever veri nice ; everyon spoke to him , and no one ever said anyth . yossarian and dunbar were much more relax , and the chaplain wa hardli uncomfort with them at all . they even defend him the night colonel cathcart tri to throw him out of the offic ’ club again , yossarian rise trucul to interven and nate shout out , “ yossarian ! ” to restrain him . colonel cathcart turn white as a sheet at the sound of yossarian ’ s name , and , to everyon ’ s amaz , retreat in horrifi disord until he bump into gener dreedl , who elbow him away with annoy and order him right back to order the chaplain to start come into the offic ’ club everi night again . the chaplain had almost as much troubl keep track of hi statu at the offic ’ club as he had rememb at which of the ten mess hall in the group he wa schedul to eat hi next meal . he would just as soon have remain kick out of the offic ’ club , had it not been for the pleasur he wa now find there with hi new companion . if the chaplain did not go to the offic ’ club at night , there wa no place els he could go . he would pass the time at yossarian ’ s and dunbar ’ s tabl with a shi , retic smile , seldom speak unless address , a glass of thick sweet wine almost untast befor him as he toy unfamiliarli with the tini corncob pipe that he affect selfconsci and occasion stuf with tobacco and smoke . he enjoy listen to nate , whose maudlin , bittersweet lament mirror much of hi own romant desol and never fail to evok in him resurg tide of long for hi wife and children . the chaplain would encourag nate with nod of comprehens or assent , amus by hi candor and immatur . nate did not glori too immodestli that hi girl wa a prostitut , and the chaplain ’ s awar stem mainli from captain black , who never slouch past their tabl without a broad wink at the chaplain and some tasteless , wound gibe about her to nate . the chaplain did not approv of captain black and found it difficult not to wish him evil . no one , not even nate , seem realli to appreci that he , chaplain robert oliv shipman , wa not just a chaplain but a human be , that he could have a charm , passion , pretti wife whom he love almost insan and three small blue-ey children with strang , forgotten face who would grow up someday to regard him as a freak and who might never forgiv him for all the social embarrass hi vocat would caus them . whi couldn ’ t anybodi understand that he wa not realli a freak but a normal , lone adult tri to lead a normal , lone adult life ? if they prick him , didn ’ t he bleed ? and if he wa tickl , didn ’ t he laugh ? it seem never to have occur to them that he , just as they , had eye , hand , organ , dimens , sens and affect , that he wa wound by the same kind of weapon they were , warm and cool by the same breez and fed by the same kind of food , although , he wa forc to conced , in a differ mess hall for each success meal . the onli person who did seem to realiz he had feel wa corpor whitcomb , who had just manag to bruis them all by go over hi head to colonel cathcart with hi propos for send form letter of condol home to the famili of men kill or wound in combat . the chaplain ’ s wife wa the one thing in the world he could be certain of , and it would have been suffici , if onli he had been left to live hi life out with just her and the children . the chaplain ’ s wife wa a reserv , diminut , agreeabl woman in her earli thirti , veri dark and veri attract , with a narrow waist , calm intellig eye , and small , bright , pointi teeth in a childlik face that wa vivaci and petit ; he kept forget what hi children look like , and each time he return to their snapshot it wa like see their face for the first time . the chaplain love hi wife and children with such tameless intens that he often want to sink to the ground helplessli and weep like a castaway crippl . he wa torment inexor by morbid fantasi involv them , by dire , hideou omen of ill and accid . hi medit were pollut with threat of dread diseas like ewe ’ s tumor and leukemia ; he saw hi infant son die two or three time everi week becaus he had never taught hi wife how to stop arteri bleed ; watch , in tear , paralyz silenc , hi whole famili electrocut , one after the other , at a baseboard socket becaus he had never told her that a human bodi would conduct electr ; all four went up in flame almost everi night when the water heater explod and set the two-stori wooden hous afir ; in ghastli , heartless , revolt detail he saw hi poor dear wife ’ s trim and fragil bodi crush to a viscou pulp against the brick wall of a market build by a half-win drunken automobil driver and watch hi hyster five-year-old daughter be led away from the grisli scene by a kindli middle-ag gentleman with snow-whit hair who rape and murder her repeatedli as soon as he had driven her off to a desert sandpit , while hi two younger children starv to death slowli in the hous after hi wife ’ s mother , who had been baby-sit , drop dead from a heart attack when news of hi wife ’ s accid wa given to her over the telephon . the chaplain ’ s wife wa a sweet , sooth , consider woman , and he yearn to touch the warm flesh of her slender arm again and stroke her smooth black hair , to hear her intim , comfort voic . she wa a much stronger person than he wa . he wrote brief , untroubl letter to her onc a week , sometim twice . he want to write urgent love letter to her all day long and crowd the endless page with desper , uninhibit confess of hi humbl worship and need and with care instruct for administ artifici respir . he want to pour out to her in torrent of self-piti all hi unbear loneli and despair and warn her never to leav the boric acid or the aspirin in reach of the children or to cross a street against the traffic light . he did not wish to worri her . the chaplain ’ s wife wa intuit , gentl , compassion and respons . almost inevit , hi reveri of reunion with her end in explicit act of love-mak . the chaplain felt most deceit presid at funer , and it would not have astonish him to learn that the apparit in the tree that day wa a manifest of the almighti ’ s censur for the blasphemi and pride inher in hi function . to simul graviti , feign grief and pretend supernatur intellig of the hereaft in so fearsom and arcan a circumst as death seem the most crimin of offens . he recalled-or wa almost convinc he recalled-th scene at the cemeteri perfectli . he could still see major major and major danbi stand somber as broken stone pillar on either side of him , see almost the exact number of enlist men and almost the exact place in which they had stood , see the four unmov men with spade , the repuls coffin and the larg , loos , triumphant mound of reddish-brown earth , and the massiv , still , depthless , muffl sky , so weirdli blank and blue that day it wa almost poison . he would rememb them forev , for they were all part and parcel of the most extraordinari event that had ever befallen him , an event perhap marvel , perhap pathological-th vision of the nake man in the tree . how could he explain it ? it wa not alreadi seen or never seen , and certainli not almost seen ; neither déjà vu , jamai vu nor presqu vu wa elast enough to cover it . wa it a ghost , then ? the dead man ’ s soul ? an angel from heaven or a minion from hell ? or wa the whole fantast episod mere the figment of a diseas imagin , hi own , of a deterior mind , a rot brain ? the possibl that there realli had been a nake man in the tree-two men , actual , sinc the first had been join shortli by a second man clad in a brown mustach and sinist dark garment from head to toe who bent forward ritualist along the limb of the tree to offer the first man someth to drink from a brown goblet-nev cross the chaplain ’ s mind . the chaplain wa sincer a veri help person who wa never abl to help anyon , not even yossarian when he final decid to seiz the bull by the horn and visit major major secretli to learn if , as yossarian had said , the men in colonel cathcart ’ s group realli were be forc to fli more combat mission than anyon els . it wa a dare , impuls move on which the chaplain decid after quarrel with corpor whitcomb again and wash down with tepid canteen water hi joyless lunch of milki way and babi ruth . he went to major major on foot so that corpor whitcomb would not see him leav , steal into the forest noiselessli until the two tent in hi clear were left behind , then drop down insid the abandon railroad ditch , where the foot wa surer . he hurri along the fossil wooden tie with accumul mutin anger . he had been browbeaten and humili success that morn by colonel cathcart , colonel korn and corpor whitcomb . he just had to make himself felt in some respect ! hi slight chest wa soon puf for breath . he move as swiftli as he could without break into a run , fear hi resolut might dissolv if he slow . soon he saw a uniform figur come toward him between the rust rail . he clamber immedi up the side of the ditch , duck insid a dens cops of low tree for conceal and sped along in hi origin direct a narrow , overgrown mossi path he found wind deep insid the shade forest . it wa tougher go there , but he plung ahead with the same reckless and consum determin , slip and stumbl often and sting hi unprotect hand on the stubborn branch block hi way until the bush and tall fern on both side spread open and he lurch past an olive-drab militari trailer on cinder block clearli visibl through the thin underbrush . he continu past a tent with a lumin pearl-gray cat sun itself outsid and past anoth trailer on cinder block and then burst into the clear of yossarian ’ s squadron . a salti dew had form on hi lip . he did not paus , but strode directli across the clear into the orderli room , where he wa welcom by a gaunt , stoop-should staff sergeant with promin cheekbon and long , veri light blond hair , who inform him gracious that he could go right in , sinc major major wa out . the chaplain thank him with a curt nod and proceed alon down the aisl between the desk and typewrit to the canva partit in the rear . he bob through the triangular open and found himself insid an empti offic . the flap fell close behind him . he wa breath hard and sweat profus . the offic remain empti . he thought he heard furtiv whisper . ten minut pass . he look about in stern displeasur , hi jaw clamp togeth indomit , and then turn suddenli to water as he rememb the staff sergeant ’ s exact word : he could go right in , sinc major major wa out . the enlist men were play a practic joke ! the chaplain shrank back from the wall in terror , bitter tear spring to hi eye . a plead whimper escap hi trembl lip . major major wa elsewher , and the enlist men in the other room had made him the butt of an inhuman prank . he could almost see them wait on the other side of the canva wall , bunch up expectantli like a pack of greedi , gloat omnivor beast of prey , readi with their barbar mirth and jeer to pounc on him brutal the moment he reappear . he curs himself for hi gullibl and wish in panic for someth like a mask or a pair of dark glass and a fals mustach to disguis him , or for a forc , deep voic like colonel cathcart ’ s and broad , muscular shoulder and bicep to enabl him to step outsid fearlessli and vanquish hi malevol persecutor with an overbear author and self-confid that would make them all quail and slink away cravenli in repent . he lack the courag to face them . the onli other way out wa the window . the coast wa clear , and the chaplain jump out of major major ’ s offic through the window , dart swiftli around the corner of the tent , and leap down insid the railroad ditch to hide . he scoot away with hi bodi doubl over and hi face contort intent into a nonchal , sociabl smile in case anyon chanc to see him . he abandon the ditch for the forest the moment he saw someon come toward him from the opposit direct and ran through the clutter forest frenziedli like someon pursu , hi cheek burn with disgrac . he heard loud , wild peal of deris laughter crash all about him and caught blur glimps of wick , beeri face smirk far back insid the bush and high overhead in the foliag of the tree . spasm of scorch pain stab through hi lung and slow him to a crippl walk . he lung and stagger onward until he could go no farther and collaps all at onc against a gnarl appl tree , bang hi head hard against the trunk as he toppl forward and hold on with both arm to keep from fall . hi breath wa a rasp , moan din in hi ear . minut pass like hour befor he final recogn himself as the sourc of the turbul roar that wa overwhelm him . the pain in hi chest abat . soon he felt strong enough to stand . he cock hi ear craftili . the forest wa quiet . there wa no demon laughter , no one wa chase him . he wa too tire and sad and dirti to feel reliev . he straighten hi dishevel cloth with finger that were numb and shake and walk the rest of the way to the clear with rigid self-control . the chaplain brood often about the danger of heart attack . corpor whitcomb ’ s jeep wa still park in the clear . the chaplain tipto stealthili around the back of corpor whitcomb ’ s tent rather than pass the entranc and risk be seen and insult by him . heav a grate sigh , he slip quickli insid hi own tent and found corpor whitcomb ensconc on hi cot , hi knee prop up . corpor whitcomb ’ s mud-cak shoe were on the chaplain ’ s blanket , and he wa eat one of the chaplain ’ s candi bar as he thumb with sneer express through one of the chaplain ’ s bibl . “ where ’ ve you been ? ” he demand rude and disinterestedli , without look up . the chaplain color and turn away evas . “ i went for a walk through the woods. ” “ all right , ” corpor whitcomb snap . “ don ’ t take me into your confid . but just wait and see what happen to my morale. ” he bit into the chaplain ’ s candi bar hungrili and continu with a full mouth . “ you had a visitor while you were gone . major major. ” the chaplain spun around with surpris and cri : “ major major ? major major wa here ? ” “ that ’ s who we ’ re talk about , isn ’ t it ? ” “ where did he go ? ” “ he jump down into that railroad ditch and took off like a frighten rabbit. ” corpor whitcomb snicker . “ what a jerk ! ” “ did he say what he want ? ” “ he said he need your help in a matter of great importance. ” the chaplain wa astound . “ major major said that ? ” “ he didn ’ t say that , ” corpor whitcomb correct with wither precis . “ he wrote it down in a seal person letter he left on your desk. ” the chaplain glanc at the bridg tabl that serv as hi desk and saw onli the abomin orange-r pear-shap plum tomato he had obtain that same morn from colonel cathcart , still lie on it side where he had forgotten it like an indestruct and incamadin symbol of hi own ineptitud . “ where is the letter ? ” “ i threw it away as soon as i tore it open and read it. ” corpor whitcomb slam the bibl shut and jump up . “ what ’ s the matter ? won ’ t you take my word for it ? ” he walk out . he walk right back in and almost collid with the chaplain , who wa rush out behind him on hi way back to major major . “ you don ’ t know how to deleg respons , ” corpor whitcomb inform him sullenli . “ that ’ s anoth one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you. ” the chaplain nod penit and hurri past , unabl to make himself take the time to apolog . he could feel the skill hand of fate motiv him imper . twice that day alreadi , he realiz now , major major had come race toward him insid the ditch ; and twice that day the chaplain had stupidli postpon the destin meet by bolt into the forest . he seeth with self-recrimin as he hasten back as rapidli as he could stride along the splinter , irregularli space railroad tie . bit of grit and gravel insid hi shoe and sock were grind the top of hi toe raw . hi pale , labor face wa screw up unconsci into a grimac of acut discomfort . the earli august afternoon wa grow hotter and more humid . it wa almost a mile from hi tent to yossarian ’ s squadron . the chaplain ’ s summer-tan shirt wa soak with perspir by the time he arriv there and rush breathlessli back insid the orderli room tent , where he wa halt peremptorili by the same treacher , soft-spoken staff sergeant with round eyeglass and gaunt cheek , who request him to remain outsid becaus major major wa insid and told him he would not be allow insid until major major went out . the chaplain look at him in an uncomprehend daze . whi did the sergeant hate him ? he wonder . hi lip were white and trembl . he wa ach with thirst . what wa the matter with peopl ? wasn ’ t there tragedi enough ? the sergeant put hi hand out and held the chaplain steadi . “ i ’ m sorri , sir , ” he said regret in a low , courteou , melancholi voic . “ but those are major major ’ s order . he never want to see anyone. ” “ he want to see me , ” the chaplain plead . “ he came to my tent to see me while i wa here before. ” “ major major did that ? ” the sergeant ask . “ ye , he did . pleas go in and ask him. ” “ i ’ m afraid i can ’ t go in , sir . he never want to see me either . perhap if you left a note. ” “ i don ’ t want to leav a note . doesn ’ t he ever make an except ? ” “ onli in extrem circumst . the last time he left hi tent wa to attend the funer of one of the enlist men . the last time he saw anyon in hi offic wa a time he wa forc to . a bombardi name yossarian forced- “ “ yossarian ? ” the chaplain lit up with excit at thi new coincid . wa thi anoth miracl in the make ? “ but that ’ s exactli whom i want to speak to him about ! did they talk about the number of mission yossarian ha to fli ? ” “ ye , sir , that ’ s exactli what they did talk about . captain yossarian had flown fifty-on mission , and he appeal to major major to ground him so that he wouldn ’ t have to fli four more . colonel cathcart want onli fifty-f mission then. ” “ and what did major major say ? ” “ major major told him there wa noth he could do. ” the chaplain ’ s face fell . “ major major said that ? ” “ ye , sir . in fact , he advis yossarian to go see you for help . are you certain you wouldn ’ t like to leav a note , sir ? i have a pencil and paper right here. ” the chaplain shook hi head , chew hi clot dri lower lip forlornli , and walk out . it wa still so earli in the day , and so much had alreadi happen . the air wa cooler in the forest . hi throat wa parch and sore . he walk slowli and ask himself ruefulli what new misfortun could possibl befal him a moment befor the mad hermit in the wood leap out at him without warn from behind a mulberri bush . the chaplain scream at the top of hi voic . the tall , cadaver stranger fell back in fright at the chaplain ’ s cri and shriek , “ don ’ t hurt me ! ” “ who are you ? ” the chaplain shout . “ pleas don ’ t hurt me ! ” the man shout back . “ i ’ m the chaplain ! ” “ then whi do you want to hurt me ? ” “ i don ’ t want to hurt you ! ” the chaplain insist with a rise hint of exasper , even though he wa still root to the spot . “ just tell me who you are and what you want from me. ” “ i just want to find out if chief white halfoat die of pneumonia yet , ” the man shout back . “ that ’ s all i want . i live here . my name is flume . i belong to the squadron , but i live here in the wood . you can ask anyone. ” the chaplain ’ s composur began trickl back as he studi the queer , cring figur intent . a pair of captain ’ s bar ulcer with rust hung on the man ’ s rag shirt collar . he had a hairi , tar-black mole on the undersid of one nostril and a heavi rough mustach the color of poplar bark . “ whi do you live in the wood if you belong to the squadron ? ” the chaplain inquir curious . “ i have to live in the wood , ” the captain repli crabbili , as though the chaplain ought to know . he straighten slowli , still watch the chaplain guardedli although he tower abov him by more than a full head . “ don ’ t you hear everybodi talk about me ? chief white halfoat swore he wa go to cut my throat some night when i wa fast asleep , and i don ’ t dare lie down in the squadron while he ’ s still alive. ” the chaplain listen to the implaus explan distrust . “ but that ’ s incred , ” he repli . “ that would be premedit murder . whi didn ’ t you report the incid to major major ? ” “ i did report the incid to major major , ” said the captain sadli , “ and major major said he would cut my throat if i ever spoke to him again. ” the man studi the chaplain fear . “ are you go to cut my throat , too ? ” “ oh , no , no , no , ” the chaplain assur him . “ of cours not . do you realli live in the forest ? ” the captain nod , and the chaplain gaze at hi porou gray pallor of fatigu and malnutrit with a mixtur of piti and esteem . the man ’ s bodi wa a boni shell insid rumpl cloth that hung on him like a disorderli collect of sack . wisp of dri grass were glu all over him ; he need a haircut badli . there were great , dark circl under hi eye . the chaplain wa move almost to tear by the harass , bedraggl pictur the captain present , and he fill with defer and compass at the thought of the mani sever rigor the poor man had to endur daili . in a voic hush with humil , he said , “ who doe your laundri ? ” the captain purs hi lip in a businesslik manner . “ i have it done by a washerwoman in one of the farmhous down the road . i keep my thing in my trailer and sneak insid onc or twice a day for a clean handkerchief or a chang of underwear. ” “ what will you do when winter come ? ” “ oh , i expect to be back in the squadron by then , ” the captain answer with a kind of martyr confid . “ chief white halfoat kept promis everyon that he wa go to die of pneumonia , and i guess i ’ ll have to be patient until the weather turn a littl colder and damper. ” he scrutin the chaplain perplexedli . “ don ’ t you know all thi ? don ’ t you hear all the fellow talk about me ? ” “ i don ’ t think i ’ ve ever heard anyon mention you. ” “ well , i certainli can ’ t understand that. ” the captain wa piqu , but manag to carri on with a pretens of optim . “ well , here it is almost septemb alreadi , so i guess it won ’ t be too long now . the next time ani of the boy ask about me , whi , just tell them i ’ ll be back grind out those old public releas again as soon as chief white halfoat die of pneumonia . will you tell them that ? say i ’ ll be back in the squadron as soon as winter come and chief halfoat die of pneumonia . okay ? ” the chaplain memor the prophet word solemnli , entranc further by their esoter import . “ do you live on berri , herb and root ? ” he ask . “ no , of cours not , ” the captain repli with surpris . “ i sneak into the mess hall through the back and eat in the kitchen . milo give me sandwich and milk. ” “ what do you do when it rain ? ” the captain answer frankli . “ i get wet. ” “ where do you sleep ? ” swiftli the captain duck down into a crouch and began back away . “ you too ? ” he cri frantic . “ oh , no , ” cri the chaplain . “ i swear to you. ” “ you do want to cut my throat ! ” the captain insist . “ i give my word , ” the chaplain plead , but it wa too late , for the home hirsut specter had alreadi vanish , dissolv so expertli insid the bloom , dappl , fragment malform of leav , light and shadow that the chaplain wa alreadi doubt that he had even been there . so mani monstrou event were occur that he wa no longer posit which event were monstrou and which were realli take place . he want to find out about the madman in the wood as quickli as possibl , to check if there ever realli had been a captain flume , but hi first chore , he recal with reluct , wa to appeas corpor whitcomb for neglect to deleg enough respons to him . he plod along the zigzag path through the forest listlessli , clog with thirst and feel almost too exhaust to go on . he wa remors when he thought of corpor whitcomb . he pray that corpor whitcomb would be gone when he reach the clear so that he could undress without embarrass , wash hi arm and chest and shoulder thoroughli , drink water , lie down refresh and perhap even sleep for a few minut ; but he wa in for still anoth disappoint and still anoth shock , for corpor whitcomb wa sergeant whitcomb by the time he arriv and wa sit with hi shirt off in the chaplain ’ s chair sew hi new sergeant ’ s stripe on hi sleev with the chaplain ’ s needl and thread . corpor whitcomb had been promot by colonel cathcart , who want to see the chaplain at onc about the letter . “ oh , no , ” groan the chaplain , sink down dumbfound on hi cot . hi warm canteen wa empti , and he wa too distraught to rememb the lister bag hang outsid in the shade between the two tent . “ i can ’ t believ it . i just can ’ t believ that anyon would serious believ that i ’ ve been forg washington irv ’ s name. ” “ not those letter , ” corpor whitcomb correct , plainli enjoy the chaplain ’ s chagrin . “ he want to see you about the letter home to the famili of casualties. ” “ those letter ? ” ask the chaplain with surpris . “ that ’ s right , ” corpor whitcomb gloat . “ he ’ s realli go to chew you out for refus to let me send them . you should have seen him go for the idea onc i remind him the letter could carri hi signatur . that ’ s whi he promot me . he ’ s absolut sure they ’ ll get him into the saturday even post. ” the chaplain ’ s befuddl increas . “ but how did he know we were even consid the idea ? ” “ i went to hi offic and told him. ” “ you did what ? ” the chaplain demand shrilli , and charg to hi feet in an unfamiliar rage . “ do you mean to say that you actual went over my head to the colonel without ask my permiss ? ” corpor whitcomb grin brazenli with scorn satisfact . “ that ’ s right , chaplain , ” he answer . “ and you better not tri to do anyth about it if you know what ’ s good for you. ” he laugh quietli in malici defianc . “ colonel cathcart isn ’ t go to like it if he find out you ’ re get even with me for bring him my idea . you know someth , chaplain ? ” corpor whitcomb continu , bite the chaplain ’ s black thread apart contemptu with a loud snap and button on hi shirt . “ that dumb bastard realli think it ’ s one of the greatest idea he ’ s ever heard. ” “ it might even get me into the saturday even post , ” colonel cathcart boast in hi offic with a smile , swagger back and forth convivi as he reproach the chaplain . “ and you didn ’ t have brain enough to appreci it . you ’ ve got a good man in corpor whitcomb , chaplain . i hope you have brain enough to appreci that. ” “ sergeant whitcomb , ” the chaplain correct , befor he could control himself . colonel cathcart oar . “ i said sergeant whitcomb , ” he repli . “ i wish you ’ d tri listen onc in a while instead of alway find fault . you don ’ t want to be a captain all your life , do you ? ” “ sir ? ” “ well , i certainli don ’ t see how you ’ re ever go to amount to anyth els if you keep on thi way . corpor whitcomb feel that you fellow haven ’ t had a fresh idea in nineteen hundr and forty-four year , and i ’ m inclin to agre with him . a bright boy , that corpor whitcomb . well , it ’ s all go to change. ” colonel cathcart sat down at hi desk with a determin air and clear a larg neat space in hi blotter . when he had finish , he tap hi finger insid it . “ start tomorrow , ” he said , “ i want you and corpor whitcomb to write a letter of condol for me to the next of kin of everi man in the group who ’ s kill , wound or taken prison . i want those letter to be sincer letter . i want them fill up with lot of person detail so there ’ ll be no doubt i mean everi word you say . is that clear ? ” the chaplain step forward impuls to remonstr . “ but , sir , that ’ s imposs ! ” he blurt out . “ we don ’ t even know all the men that well. ” “ what differ doe that make ? ” colonel cathcart demand , and then smile amic . “ corpor whitcomb brought me thi basic form letter that take care of just about everi situat . listen : ‘ dear mrs. , mr. , miss , or mr. and mrs. : word can not express the deep person grief i experienc when your husband , son , father or brother wa kill , wound or report miss in action. ’ and so on . i think that open sentenc sum up my sentiment exactli . listen , mayb you ’ d better let corpor whitcomb take charg of the whole thing if you don ’ t feel up to it. ” colonel cathcart whip out hi cigarett holder and flex it between both hand like an onyx and ivori ride crop . “ that ’ s one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you , chaplain . corpor whitcomb tell me you don ’ t know how to deleg respons . he say you ’ ve got no initi either . you ’ re not go to disagre with me , are you ? ” “ no , sir. ” the chaplain shook hi head , feel despic remiss becaus he did not know how to deleg respons and had no initi , and becaus he realli had been tempt to disagre with the colonel . hi mind wa a shambl . they were shoot skeet outsid , and everi time a gun wa fire hi sens were jar . he could not adjust to the sound of the shot . he wa surround by bushel of plum tomato and wa almost convinc that he had stood in colonel cathcart ’ s offic on some similar occas deep in the past and had been surround by those same bushel of those same plum tomato . déjà vu again . the set seem so familiar ; yet it also seem so distant . hi cloth felt grimi and old , and he wa deathli afraid he smell . “ you take thing too serious , chaplain , ” colonel cathcart told him bluntli with an air of adult object . “ that ’ s anoth one of the thing that ’ s wrong with you . that long face of your get everybodi depress . let me see you laugh onc in a while . come on , chaplain . you give me a belli laugh now and i ’ ll give you a whole bushel of plum tomatoes. ” he wait a second or two , watch , and then chortl victori . “ you see , chaplain , i ’ m right . you can ’ t give me a belli laugh , can you ? ” “ no , sir , ” admit the chaplain meekli , swallow slowli with a visibl effort . “ not right now . i ’ m veri thirsty. ” “ then get yourself a drink . colonel korn keep some bourbon in hi desk . you ought to tri drop around the offic ’ club with us some even just to have yourself a littl fun . tri get lit onc in a while . i hope you don ’ t feel you ’ re better than the rest of us just becaus you ’ re a profession man. ” “ oh , no , sir , ” the chaplain assur him with embarrass . “ as a matter of fact , i have been go to the offic ’ club the past few evenings. ” “ you ’ re onli a captain , you know , ” colonel cathcart continu , pay no attent to the chaplain ’ s remark . “ you may be a profession man , but you ’ re still onli a captain. ” “ ye , sir . i know. ” “ that ’ s fine , then . it ’ s just as well you didn ’ t laugh befor . i wouldn ’ t have given you the plum tomato anyway . corpor whitcomb tell me you took a plum tomato when you were in here thi morning. ” “ thi morn ? but , sir ! you gave it to me. ” colonel cathcart cock hi head with suspicion . “ i didn ’ t say i didn ’ t give it to you , did i ? i mere said you took it . i don ’ t see whi you ’ ve got such a guilti conscienc if you realli didn ’ t steal it . did i give it to you ? ” “ ye , sir . i swear you did. ” “ then i ’ ll just have to take your word for it . although i can ’ t imagin whi i ’ d want to give you a plum tomato. ” colonel cathcart transfer a round glass paperweight compet from the right edg of hi desk to the left edg and pick up a sharpen pencil . “ okay . chaplain , i ’ ve got a lot of import work to do now if you ’ re through . you let me know when corpor whitcomb ha sent out about a dozen of those letter and we ’ ll get in touch with the editor of the saturday even post. ” a sudden inspir made hi face brighten . “ say ! i think i ’ ll volunt the group for avignon again . that should speed thing up ! ” “ for avignon ? ” the chaplain ’ s heart miss a beat , and all hi flesh began to prickl and creep . “ that ’ s right , ” the colonel explain exuberantli . “ the sooner we get some casualti , the sooner we can make some progress on thi . i ’ d like to get in the christma issu if we can . i imagin the circul is higher then. ” and to the chaplain ’ s horror , the colonel lift the phone to volunt the group for avignon and tri to kick him out of the offic ’ club again that veri same night a moment befor yossarian rose up drunkenli , knock over hi chair , to start an aveng punch that made nate call out hi name and made colonel cathcart blanch and retreat prudent smack into gener dreedl , who shove him off hi bruis foot disgustedli and order him forward to kick the chaplain right back into the offic ’ club . it wa all veri upset to colonel cathcart , first the dread name yossarian ! toll out again clearli like a warn of doom and then gener dreedl ’ s bruis foot , and that wa anoth fault colonel cathcart found in the chaplain , the fact that it wa imposs to predict how gener dreedl would react each time he saw him . colonel cathcart would never forget the first even gener dreedl took notic of the chaplain in the offic ’ club , lift hi ruddi , swelter , intox face to stare ponder through the yellow pall of cigarett smoke at the chaplain lurk near the wall by himself . “ well , i ’ ll be damn , ” gener dreedl had exclaim hoars , hi shaggi gray menac eyebrow beetl in recognit . “ is that a chaplain i see over there ? that ’ s realli a fine thing when a man of god begin hang around a place like thi with a bunch of dirti drunk and gamblers. ” colonel cathcart compress hi lip primli and start to rise . “ i couldn ’ t agre with you more , sir , ” he assent briskli in a tone of ostentati disapprov . “ i just don ’ t know what ’ s happen to the clergi these days. ” “ they ’ re get better , that ’ s what ’ s happen to them , ” gener dreedl growl emphat . colonel cathcart gulp awkwardli and made a nimbl recoveri . “ ye , sir . they are get better . that ’ s exactli what i had in mind , sir. ” “ thi is just the place for a chaplain to be , mingl with the men while they ’ re out drink and gambl so he can get to understand them and win their confid . how the hell els is he ever go to get them to believ in god ? ” “ that ’ s exactli what i had in mind , sir , when i order him to come here , ” colonel cathcart said care , and threw hi arm familiarli around the chaplain ’ s shoulder as he walk him off into a corner to order him in a cold underton to start report for duti at the offic ’ club everi even to mingl with the men while they were drink and gambl so that he could get to understand them and win their confid . the chaplain agre and did report for duti to the offic ’ club everi night to mingl with men who want to avoid him , until the even the viciou fist fight broke out at the ping-pong tabl and chief white halfoat whirl without provoc and punch colonel moodu squar in the nose , knock colonel moodu down on the seat of hi pant and make gener dreedl roar with lusti , unexpect laughter until he spi the chaplain stand close by gawk at him grotesqu in tortur wonder . gener dreedl froze at the sight of him . he glower at the chaplain with swollen furi for a moment , hi good humor gone , and turn back toward the bar disgruntedli , roll from side to side like a sailor on hi short bandi leg . colonel cathcart canter fear along behind , glanc anxious about in vain for some sign of help from colonel korn . “ that ’ s a fine thing , ” gener dreedl growl at the bar , grip hi empti shot glass in hi burli hand . “ that ’ s realli a fine thing , when a man of god begin hang around a place like thi with a bunch of dirti drunk and gamblers. ” colonel cathcart sigh with relief . “ ye , sir , ” he exclaim proudli . “ it certainli is a fine thing. ” “ then whi the hell don ’ t you do someth about it ? ” “ sir ? ” colonel cathcart inquir , blink . “ do you think it doe you credit to have your chaplain hang around here everi night ? he ’ s in here everi goddam time i come. ” “ you ’ re right , sir , absolut right , ” colonel cathcart respond . “ it doe me no credit at all . and i am go to do someth about it , thi veri minute. ” “ aren ’ t you the one who order him to come here ? ” “ no , sir , that wa colonel korn . i intend to punish him sever , too. ” “ if he wasn ’ t a chaplain , ” gener dreedl mutter , “ i ’ d have him taken outsid and shot. ” “ he ’ s not a chaplain , sir. ” colonel cathcart advis help . “ isn ’ t he ? then whi the hell doe he wear that cross on hi collar if he ’ s not a chaplain ? ” “ he doesn ’ t wear a cross on hi collar , sir . he wear a silver leaf . he ’ s a lieuten colonel. ” “ you ’ ve got a chaplain who ’ s a lieuten colonel ? ” inquir gener dreedl with amaz . “ oh , no , sir . my chaplain is onli a captain. ” “ then whi the hell doe he wear a silver leaf on hi collar if he ’ s onli a captain ? ” “ he doesn ’ t wear a silver leaf on hi collar , sir . he wear a cross. ” “ go away from me now , you son of a bitch , ” said gener dreedl . “ or i ’ ll have you taken outsid and shot ! ” “ ye , sir. ” colonel cathcart went away from gener dreedl with a gulp and kick the chaplain out of the offic ’ club , and it wa exactli the way it almost wa two month later after the chaplain had tri to persuad colonel cathcart to rescind hi order increas the number of mission to sixti and had fail abysm in that endeavor too , and the chaplain wa readi now to capitul to despair entir but wa restrain by the memori of hi wife , whom he love and miss so pathet with such sensual and exalt ardor , and by the lifelong trust he had place in the wisdom and justic of an immort , omnipot , omnisci , human , univers , anthropomorph , english-speak , anglo-saxon , pro-american god , which had begun to waver . so mani thing were test hi faith . there wa the bibl , of cours , but the bibl wa a book , and so were bleak hous , treasur island , ethan frome and the last of the mohican . did it then seem probabl , as he had onc overheard dunbar ask , that the answer to the riddl of creation would be suppli by peopl too ignor to understand the mechan of rainfal ? had almighti god , in all hi infinit wisdom , realli been afraid that men six thousand year ago would succeed in build a tower to heaven ? where the devil wa heaven ? wa it up ? down ? there wa no up or down in a finit but expand univers in which even the vast , burn , dazzl , majest sun wa in a state of progress decay that would eventu destroy the earth too . there were no miracl ; prayer went unansw , and misfortun tramp with equal brutal on the virtuou and the corrupt ; and the chaplain , who had conscienc and charact , would have yield to reason and relinquish hi belief in the god of hi fathers-would truli have resign both hi call and hi commiss and taken hi chanc as a privat in the infantri or field artilleri , or even , perhap , as a corpor in the paratroopers-had it not been for such success mystic phenomena as the nake man in the tree at that poor sergeant ’ s funer week befor and the cryptic , haunt , encourag promis of the prophet flume in the forest onli that afternoon : “ tell them i ’ ll be back when winter comes. ” 26 aarfi in a way it wa all yossarian ’ s fault , for if he had not move the bomb line dure the big sieg of bologna , major -- de coverley might still be around to save him , and if he had not stock the enlist men ’ s apart with girl who had no other place to live , nate might never have fallen in love with hi whore as she sat nake from the waist down in the room full of grumpi blackjack player who ignor her . nate stare at her covertli from hi over-stuf yellow armchair , marvel at the bore , phlegmat strength with which she accept the mass reject . she yawn , and he wa deepli move . he had never wit such heroic pois befor . the girl had climb five steep flight of stair to sell herself to the group of satiat enlist men , who had girl live there all around them ; none want her at ani price , not even after she had strip without real enthusiasm to tempt them with a tall bodi that wa firm and full and truli voluptu . she seem more fatigu than disappoint . now she sat rest in vacuou indol , watch the card game with dull curios as she gather her recalcitr energi for the tediou chore of don the rest of her cloth and go back to work . in a littl while she stir . a littl while later she rose with an unconsci sigh and step letharg into her tight cotton panti and dark skirt , then buckl on her shoe and left . nate slip out behind her ; and when yossarian and aarfi enter the offic ’ apart almost two hour later , there she wa again , step into her panti and skirt , and it wa almost like the chaplain ’ s recur sensat of have been through a situat befor , except for nate , who wa mope inconsol with hi hand in hi pocket . “ she want to go now , ” he said in a faint , strang voic . “ she doesn ’ t want to stay. ” “ whi don ’ t you just pay her some money to let you spend the rest of the day with her ? ” yossarian advis . “ she gave me my money back , ” nate admit . “ she ’ s tire of me now and want to go look for someon else. ” the girl paus when her shoe were on to glanc in surli invit at yossarian and aarfi . her breast were pointi and larg in the thin white sleeveless sweater she wore that squeez each contour and flow outward smoothli with the top of her entic hip . yossarian return her gaze and wa strongli attract . he shook hi head . “ good riddanc to bad rubbish , ” wa aarfi ’ s unperturb respons . “ don ’ t say that about her ! ” nate protest with passion that wa both a plea and a rebuk . “ i want her to stay with me. ” “ what ’ s so special about her ? ” aarfi sneer with mock surpris . “ she ’ s onli a whore. ” “ and don ’ t call her a whore ! ” the girl shrug impass after a few more second and ambl toward the door . nate bound forward wretchedli to hold it open . he wander back in a heartbroken daze , hi sensit face eloqu with grief . “ don ’ t worri about it , ” yossarian counsel him as kindli as he could . “ you ’ ll probabl be abl to find her again . we know where all the whore hang out. ” “ pleas don ’ t call her that , ” nate beg , look as though he might cri . “ i ’ m sorri , ” murmur yossarian . aarfi thunder jovial , “ there are hundr of whore just as good crawl all over the street . that one wasn ’ t even pretty. ” he chuckl melliflu with reson disdain and author . “ whi , you rush forward to open that door as though you were in love with her. ” “ i think i am in love with her , ” nate confess in a shame , far-off voic . aarfi wrinkl hi chubbi round rosi forehead in comic disbelief . “ ho , ho , ho , ho ! ” he laugh , pat the expans forest-green side of hi offic ’ s tunic prosper . “ that ’ s rich . you in love with her ? that ’ s realli rich. ” aarfi had a date that same afternoon with a red cross girl from smith whose father own an import milk-of-magnesia plant . “ now , that ’ s the kind of girl you ought to be associ with , and not with common slut like that one . whi , she didn ’ t even look clean. ” “ i don ’ t care ! ” nate shout desper . “ and i wish you ’ d shut up , i don ’ t even want to talk about it with you. ” “ aarfi , shut up , ” said yossarian . “ ho , ho , ho , ho ! ” aarfi continu . “ i just can ’ t imagin what your father and mother would say if they knew you were run around with filthi trollop like that one . your father is a veri distinguish man , you know. ” “ i ’ m not go to tell him , ” nate declar with determin . “ i ’ m not go to say a word about her to him or mother until after we ’ re married. ” “ marri ? ” aarfi ’ s indulg merriment swell tremend . “ ho , ho , ho , ho , ho ! now you ’ re realli talk stupid . whi , you ’ re not even old enough to know what true love is. ” aarfi wa an author on the subject of true love becaus he had alreadi fallen truli in love with nate ’ s father and with the prospect of work for him after the war in some execut capac as a reward for befriend nate . aarfi wa a lead navig who had never been abl to find himself sinc leav colleg . he wa a genial , magnanim lead navig who could alway forgiv the other man in the squadron for denounc him furious each time he got lost on a combat mission and led them over concentr of antiaircraft fire . he got lost on the street of rome that same afternoon and never did find the elig red cross girl from smith with the import milk-of-magnesia plant . he got lost on the mission to ferrara the day kraft wa shot down and kill , and he got lost again on the weekli milk run to parma and tri to lead the plane out to sea over the citi of leghorn after yossarian had drop hi bomb on the undefend inland target and settl back against hi thick wall of armor plate with hi eye close and a fragrant cigarett in hi fingertip . suddenli there wa flak , and all at onc mcwatt wa shriek over the intercom , “ flak ! flak ! where the hell are we ? what the hell ’ s go on ? ” yossarian flip hi eye open in alarm and saw the total unexpect bulg black puff of flak crash down in toward them from high up and aarfi ’ s complac melon-round tiny-ey face gaze out at the approach cannon burst with affabl bemus . yossarian wa flabbergast . hi leg went abruptli to sleep . mcwatt had start to climb and wa yelp over the intercom for instruct . yossarian sprang forward to see where they were and remain in the same place . he wa unabl to move . then he realiz he wa sop wet . he look down at hi crotch with a sink , sick sensat . a wild crimson blot wa crawl upward rapidli along hi shirt front like an enorm sea monster rise to devour him . he wa hit ! separ trickl of blood spill to a puddl on the floor through one satur trouser leg like countless unstopp swarm of wriggl red worm . hi heart stop . a second solid jolt struck the plane . yossarian shudder with revuls at the queer sight of hi wound and scream at aarfi for help . “ i lost my ball ! aarfi , i lost my ball ! ” aarfi didn ’ t hear , and yossarian bent forward and tug at hi arm . “ aarfi , help me , ” he plead , almost weep , “ i ’ m hit ! i ’ m hit ! ” aarfi turn slowli with a bland , quizzic grin . “ what ? ” “ i ’ m hit , aarfi ! help me ! ” aarfi grin again and shrug amiabl . “ i can ’ t hear you , ” he said . “ can ’ t you see me ? ” yossarian cri incredul , and he point to the deepen pool of blood he felt splash down all around him and spread out underneath . “ i ’ m wound ! help me , for god ’ s sake ! aarfi , help me ! ” “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” aarfi complain tolerantli , cup hi podgi hand behind the blanch corolla of hi ear . “ what did you say ? ” yossarian answer in a collaps voic , weari suddenli of shout so much , of the whole frustrat , exasper , ridicul situat . he wa die , and no one took notic . “ never mind. ” “ what ? ” aarfi shout . “ i said i lost my ball ! can ’ t you hear me ? i ’ m wound in the groin ! ” “ i still can ’ t hear you , ” aarfi chide . “ i said never mind ! ” yossarian scream with a trap feel of terror and began to shiver , feel veri cold suddenli and veri weak . aarfi shook hi head regret again and lower hi obscen , lactesc ear almost directli into yossarian ’ s face . “ you ’ ll just have to speak up , my friend . you ’ ll just have to speak up. ” “ leav me alon , you bastard ! you dumb , insensit bastard , leav me alon ! ” yossarian sob . he want to pummel aarfi , but lack the strength to lift hi arm . he decid to sleep instead and keel over sideway into a dead faint . he wa wound in the thigh , and when he recov conscious he found mcwatt on both knee take care of him . he wa reliev , even though he still saw aarfi ’ s bloat cherub ’ s face hang down over mcwatt ’ s shoulder with placid interest . yossarian smile feebli at mcwatt , feel ill , and ask , “ who ’ s mind the store ? ” mcwatt gave no sign that he heard . with grow horror , yossarian gather in breath and repeat the word as loudli as he could . mcwatt look up . “ christ , i ’ m glad you ’ re still aliv ! ” he exclaim , heav an enorm sigh . the good-humor , friendli crinkl about hi eye were white with tension and oili with grime as he kept unrol an intermin bandag around the bulki cotton compress yossarian felt strap burdensom to the insid of one thigh . “ nate ’ s at the control . the poor kid almost start bawl when he heard you were hit . he still think you ’ re dead . they knock open an arteri for you , but i think i ’ ve got it stop . i gave you some morphine. ” “ give me some more. ” “ it might be too soon . i ’ ll give you some more when it start to hurt. ” “ it hurt now. ” “ oh , well , what the hell , ” said mcwatt and inject anoth syrett of morphin into yossarian ’ s arm . “ when you tell nate i ’ m all right… ” said yossarian to mcwatt , and lost conscious again as everyth went fuzzi behind a film of strawberry-strain gelatin and a great bariton buzz swallow him in sound . he came to in the ambul and smile encourag at doc daneeka ’ s weevil-lik , glum and overshadow counten for the dizzi second or two he had befor everyth went rose-pet pink again and then turn realli black and unfathom still . yossarian woke up in the hospit and went to sleep . when he woke up in the hospit again , the smell of ether wa gone and dunbar wa lie in pajama in the bed across the aisl maintain that he wa not dunbar but a fortiori . yossarian thought he wa crack . he curl hi lip skeptic at dunbar ’ s bit of news and slept on it fit for a day or two , then woke up while the nurs were elsewher and eas himself out of bed to see for himself . the floor sway like the float raft at the beach and the stitch on the insid of hi thigh bit into hi flesh like fine set of fish teeth as he limp across the aisl to perus the name on the temperatur card on the foot of dunbar ’ s bed , but sure enough , dunbar wa right : he wa not dunbar ani more but second lieuten anthoni f. fortiori . “ what the hell ’ s go on ? ” a. fortiori got out of bed and motion to yossarian to follow . grasp for support at anyth he could reach , yossarian limp along after him into the corridor and down the adjac ward to a bed contain a harri young man with pimpl and a reced chin . the harri young man rose on one elbow with alacr as they approach . a. fortiori jerk hi thumb over hi shoulder and said , “ screw. ” the harri young man jump out of bed and ran away . a. fortiori climb into the bed and becam dunbar again . “ that wa a. fortiori , ” dunbar explain . “ they didn ’ t have an empti bed in your ward , so i pull my rank and chase him back here into mine . it ’ s a pretti satisfi experi pull rank . you ought to tri it sometim . you ought to tri it right now , in fact , becaus you look like you ’ re go to fall down. ” yossarian felt like he wa go to fall down . he turn to the lantern jaw , leather-fac middle-ag man lie in the bed next to dunbar ’ s , jerk hi thumb over hi shoulder and said “ screw. ” the middle-ag man stiffen fierc and glare . “ he ’ s a major , ” dunbar explain . “ whi don ’ t you aim a littl lower and tri becom warrant offic homer lumley for a while ? then you can have a father in the state legislatur and a sister who ’ s engag to a champion skier . just tell him you ’ re a captain. ” yossarian turn to the startl patient dunbar had indic . “ i ’ m a captain , ” he said , jerk hi thumb over hi shoulder . “ screw. ” the startl patient jump down to the floor at yossarian ’ s command and ran away . yossarian climb up into hi bed and becam warrant offic homer lumley , who felt like vomit and wa cover suddenli with a clammi sweat . he slept for an hour and want to be yossarian again . it did not mean so much to have a father in the state legislatur and a sister who wa engag to a champion skier . dunbar led the way back to yossarian ’ s ward , where he thumb a. fortiori out of bed to becom dunbar again for a while . there wa no sign of warrant offic homer lumley . nurs cramer wa there , though , and sizzl with sanctimoni anger like a damp firecrack . she order yossarian to get right back into hi bed and block hi path so he couldn ’ t compli . her pretti face wa more repuls than ever . nurs cramer wa a good-heart , sentiment creatur who rejoic unselfishli at news of wed , engag , birth and anniversari even though she wa unacquaint with ani of the peopl involv . “ are you crazi ? ” she scold virtuous , shake an indign finger in front of hi eye . “ i suppos you just don ’ t care if you kill yourself , do you ? ” “ it ’ s my self , ” he remind her . “ i suppos you just don ’ t care if you lose your leg , do you ? ” “ it ’ s my leg. ” “ it certainli is not your leg ! ” nurs cramer retort . “ that leg belong to the u. s. govern . it ’ s no differ than a gear or a bedpan . the armi ha invest a lot of money to make you an airplan pilot , and you ’ ve no right to disobey the doctor ’ s orders. ” yossarian wa not sure he like be invest in . nurs cramer wa still stand directli in front of him so that he could not pass . hi head wa ach . nurs cramer shout at him some question he could not understand . he jerk hi thumb over hi shoulder and said , “ screw. ” nurs cramer crack him in the face so hard she almost knock him down . yossarian drew back hi fist to punch her in the jaw just as hi leg buckl and he began to fall . nurs duckett strode up in time to catch him . she address them both firmli . “ just what ’ s go on here ? ” “ he won ’ t get back into hi bed , ” nurs cramer report zealous in an injur tone . “ sue ann , he said someth absolut horribl to me . oh , i can ’ t even make myself repeat it ! ” “ she call me a gear , ” yossarian mutter . nurs duckett wa not sympathet . “ will you get back into bed , ” she said , “ or must i take you by your ear and put you there ? ” “ take me by my ear and put me there , ” yossarian dare her . nurs duckett took him by hi ear and put him back in bed . 27 nurs duckett nurs sue ann duckett wa a tall , spare , matur , straight-back woman with a promin , well-round ass , small breast and angular ascet new england featur that came equal close to be veri love and veri plain . her skin wa white and pink , her eye small , her nose and chin slender and sharp . she wa abl , prompt , strict and intellig . she welcom respons and kept her head in everi crisi . she wa adult and self-reli , and there wa noth she need from anyon . yossarian took piti and decid to help her . next morn while she wa stand bent over smooth the sheet at the foot of hi bed , he slip hi hand stealthili into the narrow space between her knee and , all at onc , brought it up swiftli under her dress as far as it would go . nurs duckett shriek and jump into the air a mile , but it wasn ’ t high enough , and she squirm and vault and seesaw back and forth on her divin fulcrum for almost a full fifteen second befor she wiggl free final and retreat frantic into the aisl with an ashen , trembl face . she back away too far , and dunbar , who had watch from the begin , sprang forward on hi bed without warn and flung both arm around her bosom from behind . nurs duckett let out anoth scream and twist away , flee far enough from dunbar for yossarian to lung forward and grab her by the snatch again . nurs duckett bounc out across the aisl onc more like a ping-pong ball with leg . dunbar wa wait vigilantli , readi to pounc . she rememb him just in time and leap asid . dunbar miss complet and sail by her over the bed to the floor , land on hi skull with a soggi , crunch thud that knock him cold . he woke up on the floor with a bleed nose and exactli the same distress head symptom he had been feign all along . the ward wa in a chaotic uproar . nurs duckett wa in tear , and yossarian wa consol her apologet as he sat besid her on the edg of a bed . the command colonel wa wroth and shout at yossarian that he would not permit hi patient to take indec liberti with hi nurs . “ what do you want from him ? ” dunbar ask plaintiv from the floor , winc at the vibrat pain in hi templ that hi voic set up . “ he didn ’ t do anything. ” “ i ’ m talk about you ! ” the thin , dignifi colonel bellow as loudli as he could . “ you ’ re go to be punish for what you did. ” “ what do you want from him ? ” yossarian call out . “ all he did wa fall on hi head. ” “ and i ’ m talk about you too ! ” the colonel declar , whirl to rage at yossarian . “ you ’ re go to be good and sorri you grab nurs duckett by the bosom. ” “ i didn ’ t grab nurs duckett by the bosom , ” said yossarian . “ i grab her by the bosom , ” said dunbar . “ are you both crazi ? ” the doctor cri shrilli , back away in pale confus . “ ye , he realli is crazi , doc , ” dunbar assur him . “ everi night he dream he ’ s hold a live fish in hi hands. ” the doctor stop in hi track with a look of eleg amaz and distast , and the ward grew still . “ he doe what ? ” he demand . “ he dream he ’ s hold a live fish in hi hand. ” “ what kind of fish ? ” the doctor inquir sternli of yossarian . “ i don ’ t know , ” yossarian answer . “ i can ’ t tell one kind of fish from another. ” “ in which hand do you hold them ? ” “ it vari , ” answer yossarian . “ it vari with the fish , ” dunbar ad help . the colonel turn and stare down at dunbar suspici with a narrow squint . “ ye ? and how come you seem to know so much about it ? ” “ i ’ m in the dream , ” dunbar answer without crack a smile . the colonel ’ s face flush with embarrass . he glare at them both with cold , unforgiv resent . “ get up off the floor and into your bed , ” he direct dunbar through thin lip . “ and i don ’ t want to hear anoth word about thi dream from either one of you . i ’ ve got a man on my staff to listen to disgust bilg like this. ” “ just whi do you think , ” care inquir major sanderson , the soft and thickset smile staff psychiatrist to whom the colonel had order yossarian sent , “ that colonel ferredg find your dream disgust ? ” yossarian repli respect . “ i suppos it ’ s either some qualiti in the dream or some qualiti in colonel ferredge. ” “ that ’ s veri well put , ” applaud major sanderson , who wore squeak gi shoe and had charcoal-black hair that stood up almost straight . “ for some reason , ” he confid , “ colonel ferredg ha alway remind me of a sea gull . he doesn ’ t put much faith in psychiatri , you know. ” “ you don ’ t like sea gull , do you ? ” inquir yossarian . “ no , not veri much , ” admit major sanderson with a sharp , nervou laugh and pull at hi pendul second chin lovingli as though it were a long goate . “ i think your dream is charm , and i hope it recur frequent so that we can continu discuss it . would you like a cigarett ? ” he smile when yossarian declin . “ just whi do you think , ” he ask knowingli , “ that you have such a strong avers to accept a cigarett from me ? ” “ i put one out a second ago . it ’ s still smolder in your ash tray. ” major sanderson chuckl . “ that ’ s a veri ingeni explan . but i suppos we ’ ll soon discov the true reason. ” he tie a sloppi doubl bow in hi open shoelac and then transfer a line yellow pad from hi desk to hi lap . “ thi fish you dream about . let ’ s talk about that . it ’ s alway the same fish , isn ’ t it ? ” “ i don ’ t know , ” yossarian repli . “ i have troubl recogn fish. ” “ what doe the fish remind you of ? ” “ other fish. ” “ and what do other fish remind you of ? ” “ other fish. ” major sanderson sat back disappointedli . “ do you like fish ? ” “ not especially. ” “ just whi do you think you have such a morbid avers to fish ? ” ask major sanderson triumphantli . “ they ’ re too bland , ” yossarian answer . “ and too bony. ” major sanderson nod understandingli , with a smile that wa agreeabl and insincer . “ that ’ s a veri interest explan . but we ’ ll soon discov the true reason , i suppos . do you like thi particular fish ? the one you ’ re hold in your hand ? ” “ i have no feel about it either way. ” “ do you dislik the fish ? do you have ani hostil or aggress emot toward it ? ” “ no , not at all . in fact , i rather like the fish. ” “ then you do like the fish. ” “ oh , no . i have no feel toward it either way. ” “ but you just said you like it . and now you say you have no feel toward it either way . i ’ ve just caught you in a contradict . don ’ t you see ? ” “ ye , sir . i suppos you have caught me in a contradiction. ” major sanderson proudli letter “ contradict ” on hi pad with hi thick black pencil . “ just whi do you think , ” he resum when he had finish , look up , “ that you made those two statement express contradictori emot respons to the fish ? ” “ i suppos i have an ambival attitud toward it. ” major sanderson sprang up with joy when he heard the word “ ambival attitud ” . “ you do understand ! ” he exclaim , wring hi hand togeth ecstat . “ oh , you can ’ t imagin how lone it ’ s been for me , talk day after day to patient who haven ’ t the slightest knowledg of psychiatri , tri to cure peopl who have no real interest in me or my work ! it ’ s given me such a terribl feel of inadequacy. ” a shadow of anxieti cross hi face . “ i can ’ t seem to shake it. ” “ realli ? ” ask yossarian , wonder what els to say . “ whi do you blame yourself for gap in the educ of other ? ” “ it ’ s silli , i know , ” major sanderson repli uneasili with a giddi , involuntari laugh . “ but i ’ ve alway depend veri heavili on the good opinion of other . i reach puberti a bit later than all the other boy my age , you see , and it ’ s given me sort of-wel , all sort of problem . i just know i ’ m go to enjoy discuss them with you . i ’ m so eager to begin that i ’ m almost reluct to digress now to your problem , but i ’ m afraid i must . colonel ferredg would be cross if he knew we were spend all our time on me . i ’ d like to show you some ink blot now to find out what certain shape and color remind you of. ” “ you can save yourself the troubl , doctor . everyth remind me of sex. ” “ doe it ? ” cri major sanderson with delight , as though unabl to believ hi ear . “ now we ’ re realli get somewher ! do you ever have ani good sex dream ? ” “ my fish dream is a sex dream. ” “ no , i mean real sex dreams-th kind where you grab some nake bitch by the neck and pinch her and punch her in the face until she ’ s all bloodi and then throw yourself down to ravish her and burst into tear becaus you love her and hate her so much you don ’ t know what els to do . that ’ s the kind of sex dream i like to talk about . don ’ t you ever have sex dream like that ? ” yossarian reflect a moment with a wise look . “ that ’ s a fish dream , ” he decid . major sanderson recoil as though he had been slap . “ ye , of cours , ” he conced frigidli , hi manner chang to one of edgi and defens antagon . “ but i ’ d like you to dream one like that anyway just to see how you react . that will be all for today . in the meantim , i ’ d also like you to dream up the answer to some of those question i ask you . these session are no more pleasant for me than they are for you , you know. ” “ i ’ ll mention it to dunbar , ” yossarian repli . “ dunbar ? ” “ he ’ s the one who start it all . it ’ s hi dream. ” “ oh , dunbar. ” major sanderson sneer , hi confid return . “ i ’ ll bet dunbar is that evil fellow who realli doe all those nasti thing you ’ re alway be blame for , isn ’ t he ? ” “ he ’ s not so evil. ” and yet you ’ ll defend him to the veri death , won ’ t you ? ” “ not that far. ” major sanderson smile tauntingli and wrote “ dunbar ” on hi pad . “ whi are you limp ? ” he ask sharpli , as yossarian move to the door . “ and what the devil is that bandag do on your leg ? are you mad or someth ? ” “ i wa wound in the leg . that ’ s what i ’ m in the hospit for. ” “ oh , no , you ’ re not , ” gloat major sanderson malici . “ you ’ re in the hospit for a stone in your salivari gland . so you ’ re not so smart after all , are you ? you don ’ t even know what you ’ re in the hospit for. ” “ i ’ m in the hospit for a wound leg , ” yossarian insist . major sanderson ignor hi argument with a sarcast laugh . “ well , give my regard to your friend dunbar . and you will tell him to dream that dream for me , won ’ t you ? ” but dunbar had nausea and dizzi with hi constant headach and wa not inclin to co-oper with major sanderson . hungri joe had nightmar becaus he had finish sixti mission and wa wait again to go home , but he wa unwil to share ani when he came to the hospit to visit . “ hasn ’ t anyon got ani dream for major sanderson ? ” yossarian ask . “ i hate to disappoint him . he feel so reject already. ” “ i ’ ve been have a veri peculiar dream ever sinc i learn you were wound , ” confess the chaplain . “ i use to dream everi night that my wife wa die or be murder or that my children were choke to death on morsel of nutriti food . now i dream that i ’ m out swim in water over my head and a shark is eat my left leg in exactli the same place where you have your bandage. ” “ that ’ s a wonder dream , ” dunbar declar . “ i bet major sanderson will love it. ” “ that ’ s a horribl dream ! ” major sanderson cri . “ it ’ s fill with pain and mutil and death . i ’ m sure you had it just to spite me . you know , i ’ m not even sure you belong in the armi , with a disgust dream like that. ” yossarian thought he spi a ray of hope . “ perhap you ’ re right , sir , ” he suggest slyli . “ perhap i ought to be ground and return to the states. ” “ hasn ’ t it ever occur to you that in your promiscu pursuit of women you are mere tri to assuag your subconsci fear of sexual impot ? ” “ ye , sir , it has. ” “ then whi do you do it ? ” “ to assuag my fear of sexual impotence. ” “ whi don ’ t you get yourself a good hobbi instead ? ” major sanderson inquir with friendli interest . “ like fish . do you realli find nurs duckett so attract ? i should think she wa rather boni . rather bland and boni , you know . like a fish. ” “ i hardli know nurs duckett. ” “ then whi did you grab her by the bosom ? mere becaus she ha one ? ” “ dunbar did that. ” “ oh , don ’ t start that again , ” major sanderson exclaim with vitriol scorn , and hurl down hi pencil disgustedli . “ do you realli think that you can absolv yourself of guilt by pretend to be someon els ? i don ’ t like you , fortiori . do you know that ? i don ’ t like you at all. ” yossarian felt a cold , damp wind of apprehens blow over him . “ i ’ m not fortiori , sir , ” he said timidli . “ i ’ m yossarian. ” “ you ’ re who ? ” “ my name is yossarian , sir . and i ’ m in the hospit with a wound leg. ” “ your name is fortiori , ” major sanderson contradict him belliger . “ and you ’ re in the hospit for a stone in your salivari gland. ” “ oh , come on , major ! ” yossarian explod . “ i ought to know who i am. ” “ and i ’ ve got an offici armi record here to prove it , ” major sanderson retort . “ you ’ d better get a grip on yourself befor it ’ s too late . first you ’ re dunbar . now you ’ re yossarian . the next thing you know you ’ ll be claim you ’ re washington irv . do you know what ’ s wrong with you ? you ’ ve got a split person , that ’ s what ’ s wrong with you. ” “ perhap you ’ re right , sir. ” yossarian agre diplomat . “ i know i ’ m right . you ’ ve got a bad persecut complex . you think peopl are tri to harm you. ” “ peopl are tri to harm me. ” “ you see ? you have no respect for excess author or obsolet tradit . you ’ re danger and deprav , and you ought to be taken outsid and shot ! ” “ are you seriou ? ” “ you ’ re an enemi of the peopl ! ” “ are you nut ? ” yossarian shout . “ no , i ’ m not nut , ” dobb roar furious back in the ward , in what he imagin wa a furtiv whisper . “ hungri joe saw them , i tell you . he saw them yesterday when he flew to napl to pick up some black-market air condition for colonel cathcart ’ s farm . they ’ ve got a big replac center there and it ’ s fill with hundr of pilot , bombardi and gunner on the way home . they ’ ve got forty-f mission , that ’ s all . a few with purpl heart have even less . replac crew are pour in from the state into the other bomber group . they want everyon to serv oversea at least onc , even administr personnel . don ’ t you read the paper ? we ’ ve got to kill him now ! ” “ you ’ ve got onli two more mission to fli , ” yossarian reason with him in a low voic . “ whi take a chanc ? ” “ i can get kill fli them , too , ” dobb answer pugnaci in hi rough , quaver , overwrought voic . “ we can kill him the first thing tomorrow morn when he drive back from hi farm . i ’ ve got the gun right here. ” yossarian goggl with amaz as dobb pull a gun out of hi pocket and display it high in the air . “ are you crazi ? ” he hiss frantic . “ put it away . and keep your idiot voic down. ” “ what are you worri about ? ” dobb ask with offend innoc . “ no one can hear us. ” “ hey , knock it off down there , ” a voic rang out from the far end of the ward . “ can ’ t you see we ’ re tri to nap ? ” “ what the hell are you , a wise guy ? ” dobb yell back and spun around with clench fist , readi to fight . he whirl back to yossarian and , befor he could speak , sneez thunder six time , stagger sideway on rubberi leg in the interv and rais hi elbow ineffect to fend each seizur off . the lid of hi wateri eye were puffi and inflam . “ who doe he think , ” he demand , snif spasmod and wipe hi nose with the back of hi sturdi wrist , “ he is , a cop or someth ? ” “ he ’ s a c.i.d . man , ” yossarian notifi him tranquilli . “ we ’ ve got three here now and more on the way . oh , don ’ t be scare . they ’ re after a forger name washington irv . they ’ re not interest in murderers. ” “ murder ? ” dobb wa affront . “ whi do you call us murder ? just becaus we ’ re go to murder colonel cathcart ? ” “ be quiet , damn you ! ” direct yossarian . “ can ’ t you whisper ? ” “ i am whisper . i- “ “ you ’ re still shouting. ” “ no , i ’ m not . i- “ “ hey , shut up down there , will you ? ” patient all over the ward began holler at dobb . “ i ’ ll fight you all ! ” dobb scream back at them , and stood up on a ricketi wooden chair , wave the gun wildli . yossarian caught hi arm and yank him down . dobb began sneez again . “ i have an allergi , ” he apolog when he had finish , hi nostril run and hi eye stream with tear . “ that ’ s too bad . you ’ d make a great leader of men without it. ” “ colonel cathcart ’ s the murder , ” dobb complain hoars when he had shove away a soil , crumpl khaki handkerchief . “ colonel cathcart ’ s the one who ’ s go to murder us all if we don ’ t do someth to stop him. ” “ mayb he won ’ t rais the mission ani more . mayb sixti is as high as he ’ ll go. ” “ he alway rais the mission . you know that better than i do. ” dobb swallow and bent hi intens face veri close to yossarian ’ s , the muscl in hi bronz , rocklik jaw bunch up into quiver knot . “ just say it ’ s okay and i ’ ll do the whole thing tomorrow morn . do you understand what i ’ m tell you ? i ’ m whisper now , ain ’ t i ? ” yossarian tore hi eye away from the gaze of burn entreati dobb had fasten on him . “ whi the goddam hell don ’ t you just go out and do it ? ” he protest . “ whi don ’ t you stop talk to me about it and do it alon ? ” “ i ’ m afraid to do it alon . i ’ m afraid to do anyth alone. ” “ then leav me out of it . i ’ d have to be crazi to get mix up in someth like thi now . i ’ ve got a million-dollar leg wound here . they ’ re go to send me home. ” “ are you crazi ? ” dobb exclaim in disbelief . “ all you ’ ve got there is a scratch . he ’ ll have you back fli combat mission the day you come out , purpl heart and all. ” “ then i realli will kill him , ” yossarian vow . “ i ’ ll come look for you and we ’ ll do it together. ” “ then let ’ s do it tomorrow while we ’ ve still got the chanc , ” dobb plead . “ the chaplain say he ’ s volunt the group for avignon again . i may be kill befor you get out . look how these hand of mine shake . i can ’ t fli a plane . i ’ m not good enough. ” yossarian wa afraid to say ye . “ i want to wait and see what happen first. ” “ the troubl with you is that you just won ’ t do anyth , ” dobb complain in a thick infuri voic . “ i ’ m do everyth i possibl can , ” the chaplain explain softli to yossarian after dobb had depart . “ i even went to the medic tent to speak to doc daneeka about help you. ” “ ye , i can see. ” yossarian suppress a smile . “ what happen ? ” “ they paint my gum purpl , ” the chaplain repli sheepishli . “ they paint hi toe purpl , too , ” nate ad in outrag . “ and then they gave him a laxative. ” “ but i went back again thi morn to see him. ” “ and they paint hi gum purpl again , ” said nate . “ but i did get to speak to him , ” the chaplain argu in a plaintiv tone of self-justif . “ doctor daneeka seem like such an unhappi man . he suspect that someon is plot to transfer him to the pacif ocean . all thi time he ’ s been think of come to me for help . when i told him i need hi help , he wonder if there wasn ’ t a chaplain i couldn ’ t go see. ” the chaplain wait in patient deject when yossarian and dunbar both broke into laughter . “ i use to think it wa immor to be unhappi , ” he continu , as though keen aloud in solitud . “ now i don ’ t know what to think ani more . i ’ d like to make the subject of immor the basi of my sermon thi sunday , but i ’ m not sure i ought to give ani sermon at all with these purpl gum . colonel korn wa veri displeas with them. ” “ chaplain , whi don ’ t you come into the hospit with us for a while and take it easi ? ” yossarian invit . “ you could be veri comfort here. ” the brash iniqu of the propos tempt and amus the chaplain for a second or two . “ no , i don ’ t think so , ” he decid reluctantli . “ i want to arrang for a trip to the mainland to see a mail clerk name wintergreen . doctor daneeka told me he could help. ” “ wintergreen is probabl the most influenti man in the whole theater of oper . he ’ s not onli a mail clerk , but he ha access to a mimeograph machin . but he won ’ t help anybodi . that ’ s one of the reason he ’ ll go far. ” “ i ’ d like to speak to him anyway . there must be somebodi who will help you. ” “ do it for dunbar , chaplain , ” yossarian correct with a superior air . “ i ’ ve got thi million-dollar leg wound that will take me out of combat . if that doesn ’ t do it , there ’ s a psychiatrist who think i ’ m not good enough to be in the army. ” “ i ’ m the one who isn ’ t good enough to be in the armi , ” dunbar whine jealous . “ it wa my dream. ” “ it ’ s not the dream , dunbar , ” yossarian explain . “ he like your dream . it ’ s my person . he think it ’ s split. ” “ it ’ s split right down the middl , ” said major sanderson , who had lace hi lumpi gi shoe for the occas and had slick hi charcoal-dul hair down with some stiffen and redol tonic . he smile ostentati to show himself reason and nice . “ i ’ m not say that to be cruel and insult , ” he continu with cruel and insult delight . “ i ’ m not say it becaus i hate you and want reveng . i ’ m not say it becaus you reject me and hurt my feel terribl . no , i ’ m a man of medicin and i ’ m be coldli object . i have veri bad news for you . are you man enough to take it ? ” “ god , no ! ” scream yossarian . “ i ’ ll go right to pieces. ” major sanderson flew instantli into a rage . “ can ’ t you even do one thing right ? ” he plead , turn beet-r with vexat and crash the side of both fist down upon hi desk togeth . “ the troubl with you is that you think you ’ re too good for all the convent of societi . you probabl think you ’ re too good for me too , just becaus i arriv at puberti late . well , do you know what you are ? you ’ re a frustrat , unhappi , disillus , undisciplin , maladjust young man ! ” major sanderson ’ s disposit seem to mellow as he reel off the uncomplimentari adject . “ ye , sir , ” yossarian agre care . “ i guess you ’ re right. ” “ of cours i ’ m right . you ’ re immatur . you ’ ve been unabl to adjust to the idea of war. ” “ ye , sir. ” “ you have a morbid avers to die . you probabl resent the fact that you ’ re at war and might get your head blown off ani second. ” “ i more than resent it , sir . i ’ m absolut incensed. ” “ you have deep-seat surviv anxieti . and you don ’ t like bigot , bulli , snob or hypocrit . subconsci there are mani peopl you hate. ” “ conscious , sir , conscious , ” yossarian correct in an effort to help . “ i hate them consciously. ” “ you ’ re antagonist to the idea of be rob , exploit , degrad , humili or deceiv . miseri depress you . ignor depress you . persecut depress you . violenc depress you . slum depress you . greed depress you . crime depress you . corrupt depress you . you know , it wouldn ’ t surpris me if you ’ re a manic-depress ! ” “ ye , sir . perhap i am. ” “ don ’ t tri to deni it. ” “ i ’ m not deni it , sir , ” said yossarian , pleas with the miracul rapport that final exist between them . “ i agre with all you ’ ve said. ” “ then you admit you ’ re crazi , do you ? ” “ crazi ? ” yossarian wa shock . “ what are you talk about ? whi am i crazi ? you ’ re the one who ’ s crazi ! ” major sanderson turn red with indign again and crash both fist down upon hi thigh . “ call me crazi , ” he shout in a sputter rage , “ is a typic sadist and vindict paranoiac reaction ! you realli are crazi ! ” “ then whi don ’ t you send me home ? ” “ and i ’ m go to send you home ! ” “ they ’ re go to send me home ! ” yossarian announc jubilantli , as he hobbl back into the ward . “ me too ! ” a. fortiori rejoic . “ they just came to my ward and told me. ” “ what about me ? ” dunbar demand petulantli of the doctor . “ you ? ” they repli with asper . “ you ’ re go with yossarian . right back into combat ! ” and back into combat they both went . yossarian wa enrag when the ambul return him to the squadron , and he went limp for justic to doc daneeka , who glare at him glumli with miseri and disdain . “ you ! ” doc daneeka exclaim mourn with accus disgust , the egg-shap pouch under both eye firm and censori . “ all you ever think of is yourself . go take a look at the bomb line if you want to see what ’ s been happen sinc you went to the hospital. ” yossarian wa startl . “ are we lose ? ” “ lose ? ” doc daneeka cri . “ the whole militari situat ha been go to hell ever sinc we captur pari . i knew it would happen. ” he paus , hi sulk ire turn to melancholi , and frown irrit as though it were all yossarian ’ s fault . “ american troop are push into german soil . the russian have captur back all of romania . onli yesterday the greek in the eighth armi captur rimini . the german are on the defens everywher ! ” doc daneeka paus again and fortifi himself with a huge breath for a pierc ejacul of grief . “ there ’ s no more luftwaff left ! ” he wail . he seem readi to burst into tear . “ the whole gothic line is in danger of collaps ! ” “ so ? ” ask yossarian . “ what ’ s wrong ? ” “ what ’ s wrong ? ” doc daneeka cri . “ if someth doesn ’ t happen soon , germani may surrend . and then we ’ ll all be sent to the pacif ! ” yossarian gawk at doc daneeka in grotesqu dismay . “ are you crazi ? do you know what you ’ re say ? ” “ yeah , it ’ s easi for you to laugh , ” doc daneeka sneer . “ who the hell is laugh ? ” “ at least you ’ ve got a chanc . you ’ re in combat and might get kill . but what about me ? i ’ ve got noth to hope for. ” “ you ’ re out of your goddam head ! ” yossarian shout at him emphat , seiz him by the shirt front . “ do you know that ? now keep your stupid mouth shut and listen to me. ” doc daneeka wrench himself away . “ don ’ t you dare talk to me like that . i ’ m a licens physician. ” “ then keep your stupid licens physician ’ s mouth shut and listen to what they told me up at the hospit . i ’ m crazi . did you know that ? ” “ so ? ” “ realli crazy. ” “ so ? ” “ i ’ m nut . cuckoo . don ’ t you understand ? i ’ m off my rocker . they sent someon els home in my place by mistak . they ’ ve got a licens psychiatrist up at the hospit who examin me , and that wa hi verdict . i ’ m realli insane. ” “ so ? ” “ so ? ” yossarian wa puzzl by doc daneeka ’ s inabl to comprehend . “ don ’ t you see what that mean ? now you can take me off combat duti and send me home . they ’ re not go to send a crazi man out to be kill , are they ? ” “ who els will go ? ” 28 dobb mcwatt went , and mcwatt wa not crazi . and so did yossarian , still walk with a limp , and when yossarian had gone two more time and then found himself menac by the rumor of anoth mission to bologna , he limp determinedli into dobb ’ s tent earli one warm afternoon , put a finger to hi mouth and said , “ shush ! ” “ what are you shush him for ? ” ask kid sampson , peel a tangerin with hi front teeth as he perus the dog-ear page of a comic book . “ he isn ’ t even say anything. ” “ screw , ” said yossarian to kid sampson , jerk hi thumb back over hi shoulder toward the entranc of the tent . kid sampson cock hi blond eyebrow discerningli and rose to co-oper . he whistl upward four time into hi droop yellow mustach and spurt away into the hill on the dent old green motorcycl he had purchas secondhand month befor . yossarian wait until the last faint bark of the motor had die away in the distanc . thing insid the tent did not seem quit normal . the place wa too neat . dobb wa watch him curious , smoke a fat cigar . now that yossarian had made up hi mind to be brave , he wa deathli afraid . “ all right , ” he said . “ let ’ s kill colonel cathcart . we ’ ll do it together. ” dobb sprang forward off hi cot with a look of wildest terror . “ shush ! ” he roar . “ kill colonel cathcart ? what are you talk about ? ” “ be quiet , damn it , ” yossarian snarl . “ the whole island will hear . have you still got that gun ? ” “ are you crazi or someth ? ” shout dobb . “ whi should i want to kill colonel cathcart ? ” “ whi ? ” yossarian stare at dobb with an incredul scowl . “ whi ? it wa your idea , wasn ’ t it ? didn ’ t you come to the hospit and ask me to do it ? ” dobb smile slowli . “ but that wa when i had onli fifty-eight mission , ” he explain , puf on hi cigar luxuri . “ i ’ m all pack now and i ’ m wait to go home . i ’ ve finish my sixti missions. ” “ so what ? ” yossarian repli . “ he ’ s onli go to rais them again. ” “ mayb thi time he won ’ t. ” “ he alway rais them . what the hell ’ s the matter with you , dobb ? ask hungri joe how mani time he ’ s pack hi bags. ” “ i ’ ve got to wait and see what happen , ” dobb maintain stubbornli . “ i ’ d have to be crazi to get mix up in someth like thi now that i ’ m out of combat. ” he flick the ash from hi cigar . “ no , my advic to you , ” he remark , “ is that you fli your sixti mission like the rest of us and then see what happens. ” yossarian resist the impuls to spit squar in hi eye . “ i may not live through sixti , ” he wheedl in a flat , pessimist voic . “ there ’ s a rumor around that he volunt the group for bologna again. ” “ it ’ s onli a rumor , ” dobb point out with a self-import air . “ you mustn ’ t believ everi rumor you hear. ” “ will you stop give me advic ? ” “ whi don ’ t you speak to orr ? ” dobb advis . “ orr got knock down into the water again last week on that second mission to avignon . mayb he ’ s unhappi enough to kill him. ” “ orr hasn ’ t got brain enough to be unhappy. ” orr had been knock down into the water again while yossarian wa still in the hospit and had eas hi crippl airplan down gentli into the glassi blue swell off marseil with such flawless skill that not one member of the six-man crew suffer the slightest bruis . the escap hatch in the front and rear section flew open while the sea wa still foam white and green around the plane , and the men scrambl out as speedili as they could in their flaccid orang mae west life jacket that fail to inflat and dangl limp and useless around their neck and waist . the life jacket fail to inflat becaus milo had remov the twin carbon-dioxid cylind from the inflat chamber to make the strawberri and crushed-pineappl ice-cream soda he serv in the offic ’ mess hall and had replac them with mimeograph note that read : “ what ’ s good for m amp ; m enterpris is good for the country. ” orr pop out of the sink airplan last . “ you should have seen him ! ” sergeant knight roar with laughter as he relat the episod to yossarian . “ it wa the funniest goddam thing you ever saw . none of the mae west would work becaus milo had stolen the carbon dioxid to make those ice-cream soda you bastard have been get in the offic ’ mess . but that wasn ’ t too bad , as it turn out . onli one of us couldn ’ t swim , and we lift that guy up into the raft after orr had work it over by it rope right up against the fuselag while we were all still stand on the plane . that littl crackpot sure ha a knack for thing like that . then the other raft came loos and drift away , so that all six of us wound up sit in one with our elbow and leg press so close against each other you almost couldn ’ t move without knock the guy next to you out of the raft into the water . the plane went down about three second after we left it and we were out there all alon , and right after that we began unscrew the cap on our mae west to see what the hell had gone wrong and found those goddam note from milo tell us that what wa good for him wa good enough for the rest of us . that bastard ! jesu , did we curs him , all except that buddi of your , orr , who just kept grin as though for all he care what wa good for milo might be good enough for the rest of us . “ i swear , you should have seen him sit up there on the rim of the raft like the captain of a ship while the rest of us just watch him and wait for him to tell us what to do . he kept slap hi hand on hi leg everi few second as though he had the shake and say , ‘ all right now , all right , ’ and giggl like a crazi littl freak , then say , ‘ all right now , all right , ’ again , and giggl like a crazi littl freak some more . it wa like watch some kind of a moron . watch him wa all that kept us from go to piec altogeth dure the first few minut , what with each wave wash over us into the raft or dump a few of us back into the water so that we had to climb back in again befor the next wave came along and wash us right back out . it wa sure funni . we just kept fall out and climb back in . we had the guy who couldn ’ t swim stretch out in the middl of the raft on the floor , but even there he almost drown , becaus the water insid the raft wa deep enough to keep splash in hi face . oh , boy ! “ then orr began open up compart in the raft , and the fun realli began . first he found a box of chocol bar and he pass those around so we sat there eat salti chocol bar while the wave kept knock us out of the raft into the water . next he found some bouillon cube and aluminum cup and made us some soup . then he found some tea . sure , he made it ! can ’ t you see him serv us tea as we sat there soak wet in water up to our ass ? now i wa fall out of the raft becaus i wa laugh so much . we were all laugh . and he wa dead seriou , except for that goofi giggl of hi and that crazi grin . what a jerk ! whatev he found he use . he found some shark repel and he sprinkl it right out into the water . he found some marker dye and he threw it into the water . the next thing he find is a fish line and dri bait , and hi face light up as though the air-sea rescu launch had just sped up to save us befor we die of exposur or befor the german sent a boat out from spezia to take us prison or machine-gun us . in no time at all , orr had that fish line out into the water , troll away as happi as a lark . ‘ lieuten , what do you expect to catch ? ’ i ask him . ‘ cod , ’ he told me . and he meant it . and it ’ s a good thing he didn ’ t catch ani , becaus he would have eaten that codfish raw if he had caught ani , and would have made us eat it , too , becaus he had found thi littl book that said it wa all right to eat codfish raw . “ the next thing he found wa thi littl blue oar about the size of a dixie-cup spoon , and , sure enough , he began row with it , tri to move all nine hundr pound of us with that littl stick . can you imagin ? after that he found a small magnet compass and a big waterproof map , and he spread the map open on hi knee and set the compass on top of it . and that ’ s how he spent the time until the launch pick us up about thirti minut later , sit there with that bait fish line out behind him , with the compass in hi lap and the map spread out on hi knee , and paddl away as hard as he could with that dinki blue oar as though he wa speed to majorca . jesu ! ” sergeant knight knew all about majorca , and so did orr , becaus yossarian had told them often of such sanctuari as spain , switzerland and sweden where american flier could be intern for the durat of the war under condit of utmost eas and luxuri mere by fli there . yossarian wa the squadron ’ s lead author on intern and had alreadi begun plot an emerg head into switzerland on everi mission he flew into northernmost itali . he would certainli have prefer sweden , where the level of intellig wa high and where he could swim nude with beauti girl with low , demur voic and sire whole happi , undisciplin tribe of illegitim yossarian that the state would assist through parturit and launch into life without stigma ; but sweden wa out of reach , too far away , and yossarian wait for the piec of flak that would knock out one engin over the italian alp and provid him with the excus for head for switzerland . he would not even tell hi pilot he wa guid him there . yossarian often thought of scheme with some pilot he trust to fake a crippl engin and then destroy the evid of decept with a belli land , but the onli pilot he realli trust wa mcwatt , who wa happiest where he wa and still got a big boot out of buzz hi plane over yossarian ’ s tent or roar in so low over the bather at the beach that the fierc wind from hi propel slash dark furrow in the water and whip sheet of spray flap back for second afterward . dobb and hungri joe were out of the question , and so wa orr , who wa tinker with the valv of the stove again when yossarian limp despond back into the tent after dobb had turn him down . the stove orr wa manufactur out of an invert metal drum stood in the middl of the smooth cement floor he had construct . he wa work sedul on both knee . yossarian tri pay no attent to him and limp wearili to hi cot and sat down with a labor , drawn-out grunt . prickl of perspir were turn chilli on hi forehead . dobb had depress him . doc daneeka depress him . an omin vision of doom depress him when he look at orr . he began tick with a varieti of intern tremor . nerv twitch , and the vein in one wrist began palpit . orr studi yossarian over hi shoulder , hi moist lip drawn back around convex row of larg buck teeth . reach sideway , he dug a bottl of warm beer out of hi foot locker , and he hand it to yossarian after pri off the cap . neither said a word . yossarian sip the bubbl off the top and tilt hi head back . orr watch him cunningli with a noiseless grin . yossarian eye orr guardedli . orr snicker with a slight , mucid sibil and turn back to hi work , squat . yossarian grew tens . “ don ’ t start , ” he beg in a threaten voic , both hand tighten around hi beer bottl . “ don ’ t start work on your stove. ” orr cackl quietli . “ i ’ m almost finished. ” “ no , you ’ re not . you ’ re about to begin. ” “ here ’ s the valv . see ? it ’ s almost all together. ” “ and you ’ re about to take it apart . i know what you ’ re do , you bastard . i ’ ve seen you do it three hundr times. ” orr shiver with glee . “ i want to get the leak in thi gasolin line out , ” he explain . “ i ’ ve got it down now to where it ’ s onli an ooze. ” “ i can ’ t watch you , ” yossarian confess tonelessli . “ if you want to work with someth big , that ’ s okay . but that valv is fill with tini part , and i just haven ’ t got the patienc right now to watch you work so hard over thing that are so goddam small and unimportant. ” “ just becaus they ’ re small doesn ’ t mean they ’ re unimportant. ” “ i don ’ t care. ” “ onc more ? ” “ when i ’ m not around . you ’ re a happi imbecil and you don ’ t know what it mean to feel the way i do . thing happen to me when you work over small thing that i can ’ t even begin to explain . i find out that i can ’ t stand you . i start to hate you , and i ’ m soon think serious about bust thi bottl down on your head or stab you in the neck with that hunt knife there . do you understand ? ” orr nod veri intellig . “ i won ’ t take the valv apart now , ” he said , and began take it apart , work with slow , tireless , intermin precis , hi rustic , ungainli face bent veri close to the floor , pick painstakingli at the minut mechan in hi finger with such limitless , plod concentr that he seem scarc to be think of it at all . yossarian curs him silent and made up hi mind to ignor him . “ what the hell ’ s your hurri with that stove , anyway ? ” he bark out a moment later in spite of himself . “ it ’ s still hot out . we ’ re probabl go swim later . what are you worri about the cold for. ” “ the day are get shorter , ” orr observ philosoph . “ i ’ d like to get thi all finish for you while there ’ s still time . you ’ ll have the best stove in the squadron when i ’ m through . it will burn all night with thi feed control i ’ m fix , and these metal plate will radiat the heat all over the tent . if you leav a helmet full of water on thi thing when you go to sleep , you ’ ll have warm water to wash with all readi for you when you wake up . won ’ t that be nice ? if you want to cook egg or soup , all you ’ ll have to do is set the pot down here and turn the fire up. ” “ what do you mean , me ? ” yossarian want to know . “ where are you go to be ? ” orr ’ s stunt torso shook suddenli with a muffl spasm of amus . “ i don ’ t know , ” he exclaim , and a weird , waver giggl gush out suddenli through hi chatter buck teeth like an explod jet of emot . he wa still laugh when he continu , and hi voic wa clog with saliva . “ if they keep on shoot me down thi way , i don ’ t know where i ’ m go to be. ” yossarian wa move . “ whi don ’ t you tri to stop fli , orr ? you ’ ve got an excuse. ” “ i ’ ve onli got eighteen missions. ” “ but you ’ ve been shot down on almost everi one . you ’ re either ditch or crash-land everi time you go up. ” “ oh , i don ’ t mind fli mission . i guess they ’ re lot of fun . you ought to tri fli a few with me when you ’ re not fli lead . just for laugh . tee-hee. ” orr gaze up at yossarian through the corner of hi eye with a look of point mirth . yossarian avoid hi stare . “ they ’ ve got me fli lead again. ” “ when you ’ re not fli lead . if you had ani brain , do you know what you ’ d do ? you ’ d go right to piltchard and wren and tell them you want to fli with me. ” “ and get shot down with you everi time you go up ? what ’ s the fun in that ? ” “ that ’ s just whi you ought to do it , ” orr insist . “ i guess i ’ m just about the best pilot around now when it come to ditch or make crash land . it would be good practic for you. ” “ good practic for what ? ” “ good practic in case you ever have to ditch or make a crash land . tee-hee-hee. ” “ have you got anoth bottl of beer for me ? ” yossarian ask moros . “ do you want to bust it down on my head ? ” thi time yossarian did laugh . “ like that whore in that apart in rome ? ” orr snigger lewdli , hi bulg crab appl cheek blow outward with pleasur . “ do you realli want to know whi she wa hit me over the head with her shoe ? ” he teas . “ i do know , ” yossarian teas back . “ nate ’ s whore told me. ” orr grin like a gargoyl . “ no she didn ’ t. ” yossarian felt sorri for orr . orr wa so small and ugli . who would protect him if he live ? who would protect a warm-heart , simple-mind gnome like orr from rowdi and cliqu and from expert athlet like applebi who had fli in their eye and would walk right over him with swagger conceit and self-assur everi chanc they got ? yossarian worri frequent about orr . who would shield him against animos and deceit , against peopl with ambit and the embitt snobberi of the big shot ’ s wife , against the squalid , corrupt indign of the profit motiv and the friendli neighborhood butcher with inferior meat ? orr wa a happi and unsuspect simpleton with a thick mass of wavi polychromat hair part down the center . he would be mere child ’ s play for them . they would take hi money , screw hi wife and show no kind to hi children . yossarian felt a flood of compass sweep over him . orr wa an eccentr midget , a freakish , likabl dwarf with a smutti mind and a thousand valuabl skill that would keep him in a low incom group all hi life . he could use a solder iron and hammer two board togeth so that the wood did not split and the nail did not bend . he could drill hole . he had built a good deal more in the tent while yossarian wa away in the hospit . he had file or chisel a perfect channel in the cement so that the slender gasolin line wa flush with the floor as it ran to the stove from the tank he had built outsid on an elev platform . he had construct andiron for the fireplac out of excess bomb part and had fill them with stout silver log , and he had frame with stain wood the photograph of girl with big breast he had torn out of cheesecak magazin and hung over the mantelpiec . orr could open a can of paint . he could mix paint , thin paint , remov paint . he could chop wood and measur thing with a ruler . he knew how to build fire . he could dig hole , and he had a real gift for bring water for them both in can and canteen from the tank near the mess hall . he could engross himself in an inconsequenti task for hour without grow restless or bore , as oblivi to fatigu as the stump of a tree , and almost as taciturn . he had an uncanni knowledg of wildlif and wa not afraid of dog or cat or beetl or moth , or of food like scrod or tripe . yossarian sigh drearili and began brood about the rumor mission to bologna . the valv orr wa dismantl wa about the size of a thumb and contain thirty-seven separ part , exclud the case , mani of them so minut that orr wa requir to pinch them tightli between the tip of hi fingernail as he place them care on the floor in orderli , catalogu row , never quicken hi movement or slow them down , never tire , never paus in hi relentless , method , monoton procedur unless it wa to leer at yossarian with maniac mischief . yossarian tri not to watch him . he count the part and thought he would go clear out of hi mind . he turn away , shut hi eye , but that wa even wors , for now he had onli the sound , the tini madden , indefatig , distinct click and rustl of hand and weightless part . orr wa breath rhythmic with a nois that wa stertor and repuls . yossarian clench hi fist and look at the long bone-handl hunt knife hang in a holster over the cot of the dead man in the tent . as soon as he thought of stab orr , hi tension eas . the idea of murder orr wa so ridicul that he began to consid it serious with queer whimsi and fascin . he search the nape of orr ’ s neck for the probabl site of the medulla oblongata . just the daintiest stick there would kill him and solv so mani seriou , agon problem for them both . “ doe it hurt ? ” orr ask at precis that moment , as though by protect instinct . yossarian eye him close . “ doe what hurt ? ” “ your leg , ” said orr with a strang , mysteri laugh . “ you still limp a little. ” “ it ’ s just a habit , i guess , ” said yossarian , breath again with relief . “ i ’ ll probabl get over it soon. ” orr roll over sideway to the floor and came up on one knee , face toward yossarian . “ do you rememb , ” he drawl reflect , with an air of labor recollect , “ that girl who wa hit me on the head that day in rome ? ” he chuckl at yossarian ’ s involuntari exclam of trick annoy . “ i ’ ll make a deal with you about that girl . i ’ ll tell you whi that girl wa hit me on the head with her shoe that day if you answer one question. ” “ what ’ s the question ? ” “ did you ever screw nate ’ s girl ? ” yossarian laugh with surpris . “ me ? no . now tell me whi that girl hit you with her shoe. ” “ that wasn ’ t the question , ” orr inform him with victori delight . “ that wa just convers . she act like you screw her. ” “ well , i didn ’ t . how doe she act ? ” “ she act like she don ’ t like you. ” “ she doesn ’ t like anyone. ” “ she like captain black , ” orr remind . “ that ’ s becaus he treat her like dirt . anyon can get a girl that way. ” “ she wear a slave bracelet on her leg with hi name on it. ” “ he make her wear it to needl nately. ” “ she even give him some of the money she get from nately. ” “ listen , what do you want from me ? ” “ did you ever screw my girl ? ” “ your girl ? who the hell is your girl ? ” “ the one who hit me over the head with her shoe. ” “ i ’ ve been with her a coupl of time , ” yossarian admit . “ sinc when is she your girl ? what are you get at ? ” “ she don ’ t like you , either. ” “ what the hell do i care if she like me or not ? she like me as much as she like you. ” “ did she ever hit you over the head with her shoe ? ” “ orr , i ’ m tire . whi don ’ t you leav me alon ? ” “ tee-hee-he . how about that skinni countess in rome and her skinni daughter-in-law ? ” orr persist impishli with increas zest . “ did you ever screw them ? ” “ oh , how i wish i could , ” sigh yossarian honestli , imagin , at the mere question , the prurient , use , decay feel in hi pet hand of their teeni , pulpi buttock and breast . “ they don ’ t like you either , ” comment orr . “ they like aarfi , and they like nate , but they don ’ t like you . women just don ’ t seem to like you . i think they think you ’ re a bad influence. ” “ women are crazi , ” yossarian answer , and wait grimli for what he knew wa come next . “ how about that other girl of your ? ” orr ask with a pretens of pensiv curios . “ the fat one ? the bald one ? you know , that fat bald one in sicili with the turban who kept sweat all over us all night long ? is she crazi too ? ” “ didn ’ t she like me either ? ” “ how could you do it to a girl with no hair ? ” “ how wa i suppos to know she had no hair ? ” “ i knew it , ” orr brag . “ i knew it all the time. ” “ you knew she wa bald ? ” yossarian exclaim in wonder . “ no , i knew thi valv wouldn ’ t work if i left a part out , ” orr answer , glow with cranberry-r elat becaus he had just dupe yossarian again . “ will you pleas hand me that small composit gasket that roll over there ? it ’ s right near your foot. ” “ no it isn ’ t. ” “ right here , ” said orr , and took hold of someth invis with the tip of hi fingernail and held it up for yossarian to see . “ now i ’ ll have to start all over again. ” “ i ’ ll kill you if you do . i ’ ll murder you right on the spot. ” “ whi don ’ t you ever fli with me ? ” orr ask suddenli , and look straight into yossarian ’ s face for the first time . “ there , that ’ s the question i want you to answer . whi don ’ t you ever fli with me ? ” yossarian turn away with intens shame and embarrass . “ i told you whi . they ’ ve got me fli lead bombardi most of the time. ” “ that ’ s not whi , ” orr said , shake hi head . “ you went to piltchard and wren after the first avignon mission and told them you didn ’ t ever want to fli with me . that ’ s whi , isn ’ t it ? ” yossarian felt hi skin turn hot . “ no i didn ’ t , ” he lie . “ ye you did , ” orr insist equabl . “ you ask them not to assign you to ani plane pilot by me , dobb or hupl becaus you didn ’ t have confid in us at the control . and piltchard and wren said they couldn ’ t make an except of you becaus it wouldn ’ t be fair to the men who did have to fli with us. ” “ so ? ” said yossarian . “ it didn ’ t make ani differ then , did it ? ” “ but they ’ ve never made you fli with me. ” orr , work on both knee again , wa address yossarian without bitter or reproach , but with injur humil , which wa infinit more pain to observ , although he wa still grin and snicker , as though the situat were comic . “ you realli ought to fli with me , you know . i ’ m a pretti good pilot , and i ’ d take care of you . i may get knock down a lot , but that ’ s not my fault , and nobodi ’ s ever been hurt in my plane . ye , sir-if you had ani brain , you know what you ’ d do ? you ’ d go right to piltchard and wren and tell them you want to fli all your mission with me. ” yossarian lean forward and peer close into orr ’ s inscrut mask of contradictori emot . “ are you tri to tell me someth ? ” “ tee-hee-hee-he , ” orr respond . “ i ’ m tri to tell you whi that big girl with the shoe wa hit me on the head that day . but you just won ’ t let me. ” “ tell me. ” “ will you fli with me ? ” yossarian laugh and shook hi head . “ you ’ ll onli get knock down into the water again. ” orr did get knock down into the water again when the rumor mission to bologna wa flown , and he land hi single-engin plane with a smash jar on the choppi , windswept wave toss and fall below the warlik black thundercloud mobil overhead . he wa late get out of the plane and end up alon in a raft that began drift away from the men in the other raft and wa out of sight by the time the air-sea rescu launch came plow up through the wind and splatter raindrop to take them aboard . night wa alreadi fall by the time they were return to the squadron . there wa no word of orr . “ don ’ t worri , ” reassur kid sampson , still wrap in the heavi blanket and raincoat in which he had been swaddl on the boat by hi rescuer . “ he ’ s probabl been pick up alreadi if he didn ’ t drown in that storm . it didn ’ t last long . i bet he ’ ll show up ani minute. ” yossarian walk back to hi tent to wait for orr to show up ani minut and lit a fire to make thing warm for him . the stove work perfectli , with a strong , robust blaze that could be rais or lower by turn the tap orr had final finish repair . a light rain wa fall , drum softli on the tent , the tree , the ground . yossarian cook a can of hot soup to have readi for orr and ate it all himself as the time pass . he hard-boil some egg for orr and ate those too . then he ate a whole tin of cheddar chees from a packag of k ration . each time he caught himself worri he made himself rememb that orr could do everyth and broke into silent laughter at the pictur of orr in the raft as sergeant knight had describ him , bent forward with a busi , preoccupi smile over the map and compass in hi lap , stuf one soaking-wet chocol bar after anoth into hi grin , titter mouth as he paddl away duti through the lightn , thunder and rain with the bright-blu useless toy oar , the fish line with dri bait trail out behind him . yossarian realli had no doubt about orr ’ s abil to surviv . if fish could be caught with that silli fish line , orr would catch them , and if it wa codfish he wa after , then orr would catch a codfish , even though no codfish had ever been caught in those water befor . yossarian put anoth can of soup up to cook and ate that too when it wa hot . everi time a car door slam , he broke into a hope smile and turn expectantli toward the entranc , listen for footstep . he knew that ani moment orr would come walk into the tent with big , glisten , rain-soak eye , cheek and buck teeth , look ludicr like a jolli new england oysterman in a yellow oilskin rain hat and slicker numer size too larg for him and hold up proudli for yossarian ’ s amus a great dead codfish he had caught . but he didn ’ t . 29 peckem there wa no word about orr the next day , and sergeant whitcomb , with commend dispatch and consider hope , drop a remind in hi tickler file to send a form letter over colonel cathcart ’ s signatur to orr ’ s next of kin when nine more day had elaps . there wa word from gener peckem ’ s headquart , though , and yossarian wa drawn to the crowd of offic and enlist men in short and bath trunk buzz in grumpi confus around the bulletin board just outsid the orderli room . “ what ’ s so differ about thi sunday , i want to know ? ” hungri joe wa demand vocifer of chief white halfoat . “ whi won ’ t we have a parad thi sunday when we don ’ t have a parad everi sunday ? huh ? ” yossarian work hi way through to the front and let out a long , agon groan when he read the ters announc there : due to circumst beyond my control , there will be no big parad thi sunday afternoon . colonel scheisskopf dobb wa right . they were inde send everyon oversea , even lieuten scheisskopf , who had resist the move with all the vigor and wisdom at hi command and who report for duti at gener peckem ’ s offic in a mood of grave discont . gener peckem welcom colonel scheisskopf with effus charm and said he wa delight to have him . an addit colonel on hi staff meant that he could now begin agit for two addit major , four addit captain , sixteen addit lieuten and untold quantiti of addit enlist men , typewrit , desk , file cabinet , automobil and other substanti equip and suppli that would contribut to the prestig of hi posit and increas hi strike power in the war he had declar against gener dreedl . he now had two full colonel ; gener dreedl had onli five , and four of those were combat command . with almost no intrigu at all , gener peckem had execut a maneuv that would eventu doubl hi strength . and gener dreedl wa get drunk more often . the futur look wonder , and gener peckem contempl hi bright new colonel enchantedli with an effulg smile . in all matter of consequ , gener p. p. peckem wa , as he alway remark when he wa about to critic the work of some close associ publicli , a realist . he wa a handsom , pink-skin man of fifty-thre . hi manner wa alway casual and relax , and hi uniform were custom-mad . he had silver-gray hair , slightli myopic eye and thin , overhang , sensual lip . he wa a percept , grace , sophist man who wa sensit to everyon ’ s weak but hi own and found everyon absurd but himself . gener peckem laid great , fastidi stress on small matter of tast and style . he wa alway augment thing . approach event were never come , but alway upcom . it wa not true that he wrote memorandum prais himself and recommend that hi author be enhanc to includ all combat oper ; he wrote memoranda . and the prose in the memoranda of other offic wa alway turgid , stilt , or ambigu . the error of other were inevit deplor . regul were stringent , and hi data never wa obtain from a reliabl sourc , but alway were obtain . gener peckem wa frequent constrain . thing were often incumb upon him , and he frequent act with greatest reluct . it never escap hi memori that neither black nor white wa a color , and he never use verbal when he meant oral . he could quot glibli from plato , nietzsch , montaign , theodor roosevelt , the marqui de sade and warren g. hard . a virgin audienc like colonel scheisskopf wa grist for gener peckem ’ s mill , a stimul opportun to throw open hi whole dazzl erudit treasur hous of pun , wisecrack , slander , homili , anecdot , proverb , epigram , apophthegm , bon mot and other pungent say . he beam urban as he began orient colonel scheisskopf to hi new surround . “ my onli fault , ” he observ with practic good humor , watch for the effect of hi word , “ is that i have no faults. ” colonel scheisskopf didn ’ t laugh , and gener peckem wa stun . a heavi doubt crush hi enthusiasm . he had just open with one of hi most trust paradox , and he wa posit alarm that not the slightest flicker of acknowledg had move across that impervi face , which began to remind him suddenli , in hue and textur , of an unus soap eras . perhap colonel scheisskopf wa tire , gener peckem grant to himself charit ; he had come a long way , and everyth wa unfamiliar . gener peckem ’ s attitud toward all the personnel in hi command , offic and enlist men , wa mark by the same easi spirit of toler and permiss . he mention often that if the peopl who work for him met him halfway , he would meet them more than halfway , with the result , as he alway ad with an astut chuckl , that there wa never ani meet of the mind at all . gener peckem thought of himself as aesthet and intellectu . when peopl disagre with him , he urg them to be object . and it wa inde an object peckem who gaze at colonel scheisskopf encouragingli and resum hi indoctrin with an attitud of magnanim forgiv . “ you ’ ve come to us just in time , scheisskopf . the summer offens ha peter out , thank to the incompet leadership with which we suppli our troop , and i have a cri need for a tough , experienc , compet offic like you to help produc the memoranda upon which we reli so heavili to let peopl know how good we are and how much work we ’ re turn out . i hope you are a prolif writer. ” “ i don ’ t know anyth about write , ” colonel scheisskopf retort sullenli . “ well , don ’ t let that troubl you , ” gener peckem continu with a careless flick of hi wrist . “ just pass the work i assign you along to somebodi els and trust to luck . we call that deleg of respons . somewher down near the lowest level of thi co-ordin organ i run are peopl who do get the work done when it reach them , and everyth manag to run along smoothli without too much effort on my part . i suppos that ’ s becaus i am a good execut . noth we do in thi larg depart of our is realli veri import , and there ’ s never ani rush . on the other hand , it is import that we let peopl know we do a great deal of it . let me know if you find yourself shorthand . i ’ ve alreadi put in a requisit for two major , four captain and sixteen lieuten to give you a hand . while none of the work we do is veri import , it is import that we do a great deal of it . don ’ t you agre ? ” “ what about the parad ? ” colonel scheisskopf broke in . “ what parad ? ” inquir gener peckem with a feel that hi polish just wasn ’ t get across . “ won ’ t i be abl to conduct parad everi sunday afternoon ? ” colonel scheisskopf demand petulantli . “ no . of cours not . what ever gave you that idea ? ” “ but they said i could. ” “ who said you could ? ” “ the offic who sent me oversea . they told me i ’ d be abl to march the men around in parad all i want to. ” “ they lie to you. ” “ that wasn ’ t fair , sir. ” “ i ’ m sorri , scheisskopf . i ’ m will to do everyth i can to make you happi here , but parad are out of the question . we don ’ t have enough men in our own organ to make up much of a parad , and the combat unit would rise up in open rebellion if we tri to make them march . i ’ m afraid you ’ ll just have to hold back awhil until we get control . then you can do what you want with the men. ” “ what about my wife ? ” colonel scheisskopf demand with disgruntl suspicion . “ i ’ ll still be abl to send for her , won ’ t i ? ” “ your wife ? whi in the world should you want to ? ” “ a husband and wife should be together. ” “ that ’ s out of the question also. ” “ but they said i could send for her ! ” “ they lie to you again. ” “ they had no right to lie to me ! ” colonel scheisskopf protest , hi eye wet with indign . “ of cours they had a right , ” gener peckem snap with cold and calcul sever , resolv right then and there to test the mettl of hi new colonel under fire . “ don ’ t be such an ass , scheisskopf . peopl have a right to do anyth that ’ s not forbidden by law , and there ’ s no law against lie to you . now , don ’ t ever wast my time with such sentiment platitud again . do you hear ? ” “ ye , sir , ” murmur colonel scheisskopf colonel scheisskopf wilt pathet , and gener peckem bless the fate that had sent him a weakl for a subordin . a man of spunk would have been unthink . have won , gener peckem relent . he did not enjoy humili hi men . “ if your wife were a wac , i could probabl have her transfer here . but that ’ s the most i can do. ” “ she ha a friend who ’ s a wac , ” colonel scheisskopf offer hope . “ i ’ m afraid that isn ’ t good enough . have mrs. scheisskopf join the wac if she want to , and i ’ ll bring her over here . but in the meantim , my dear colonel , let ’ s get back to our littl war , if we may . here , briefli , is the militari situat that confront us. ” gener peckem rose and move toward a rotari rack of enorm color map . colonel scheisskopf blanch . “ we ’ re not go into combat , are we ? ” he blurt out in horror . “ oh , no , of cours not , ” gener peckem assur him indulg , with a companion laugh . “ pleas give me some credit , won ’ t you ? that ’ s whi we ’ re still down here in rome . certainli , i ’ d like to be up in florenc , too , where i could keep in closer touch with ex-p.f.c . wintergreen . but florenc is still a bit too near the actual fight to suit me. ” gener peckem lift a wooden pointer and swept the rubber tip cheer across itali from one coast to the other . “ these , scheisskopf , are the german . they ’ re dug into these mountain veri solidli in the gothic line and won ’ t be push out till late next spring , although that isn ’ t go to stop those clod we have in charg from tri . that give us in special servic almost nine month to achiev our object . and that object is to captur everi bomber group in the u.s. air forc . after all , ” said gener peckem with hi low , well-modul chuckl , “ if drop bomb on the enemi isn ’ t a special servic , i wonder what in the world is . don ’ t you agre ? ” colonel scheisskopf gave no indic that he did agre , but gener peckem wa alreadi too entranc with hi own loquac to notic . “ our posit right now is excel . reinforc like yourself keep arriv , and we have more than enough time to plan our entir strategi care . our immedi goal , ” he said , “ is right here. ” and gener peckem swung hi pointer south to the island of pianosa and tap it significantli upon a larg word that had been letter on there with black greas pencil . the word wa dreedl . colonel scheisskopf , squint , move veri close to the map , and for the first time sinc he enter the room a light of comprehens shed a dim glow over hi stolid face . “ i think i understand , ” he exclaim . “ ye , i know i understand . our first job is to captur dreedl away from the enemi . right ? ” gener peckem laugh benignli . “ no , scheisskopf . dreedl ’ s on our side , and dreedl is the enemi . gener dreedl command four bomb group that we simpli must captur in order to continu our offens . conquer gener dreedl will give us the aircraft and vital base we need to carri our oper into other area . and that battl , by the way , is just about won. ” gener peckem drift toward the window , laugh quietli again , and settl back against the sill with hi arm fold , greatli satisfi by hi own wit and by hi knowledg , blase impud . the skill choic of word he wa exercis wa exquisit titil . gener peckem like listen to himself talk , like most of all listen to himself talk about himself . “ gener dreedl simpli doesn ’ t know how to cope with me , ” he gloat . “ i keep invad hi jurisdict with comment and critic that are realli none of my busi , and he doesn ’ t know what to do about it . when he accus me of seek to undermin him , i mere answer that my onli purpos in call attent to hi error is to strengthen our war effort by elimin ineffici . then i ask him innoc if he ’ s oppos to improv our war effort . oh , he grumbl and he bristl and he bellow , but he ’ s realli quit helpless . he ’ s simpli out of style . he ’ s turn into quit a sous , you know . the poor blockhead shouldn ’ t even be a gener . he ha no tone , no tone at all . thank god he isn ’ t go to last. ” gener peckem chuckl with jaunti relish and sail smoothli along toward a favorit learn allus . “ i sometim think of myself as fortinbras-ha , ha-in the play hamlet by william shakespear , who just keep circl and circl around the action until everyth els fall apart , and then stroll in at the end to pick up all the piec for himself . shakespear is- “ “ i don ’ t know anyth about play , ” colonel scheisskopf broke in bluntli . gener peckem look at him with amaz . never befor had a refer of hi to shakespear ’ s hallow hamlet been ignor and trampl upon with such rude indiffer . he began to wonder with genuin concern just what sort of shithead the pentagon had foist on him . “ what do you know about ? ” he ask acidli . “ parad , ” answer colonel scheisskopf eagerli . “ will i be abl to send out memo about parad ? ” “ as long as you don ’ t schedul any. ” gener peckem return to hi chair still wear a frown . “ and as long as they don ’ t interfer with your main assign of recommend that the author of special servic be expand to includ combat activities. ” “ can i schedul parad and then call them off ? ” gener peckem brighten instantli . “ whi , that ’ s a wonder idea ! but just send out weekli announc postpon the parad . don ’ t even bother to schedul them . that would be infinit more disconcerting. ” gener peckem wa blossom spryli with cordial again . “ ye , scheisskopf , ” he said , “ i think you ’ ve realli hit on someth . after all , what combat command could possibl quarrel with us for notifi hi men that there won ’ t be a parad that come sunday ? we ’ d be mere state a wide known fact . but the implic is beauti . ye , posit beauti . we ’ re impli that we could schedul a parad if we chose to . i ’ m go to like you , scheisskopf . stop in and introduc yourself to colonel cargil and tell him what you ’ re up to . i know you two will like each other. ” colonel cargil came storm into gener peckem ’ s offic a minut later in a furor of timid resent . “ i ’ ve been here longer than scheisskopf , ” he complain . “ whi can ’ t i be the one to call off the parad ? ” “ becaus scheisskopf ha experi with parad , and you haven ’ t . you can call off u.s.o . show if you want to . in fact whi don ’ t you ? just think of all the place that won ’ t be get a u.s.o . show on ani given day . think of all the place each big-nam entertain won ’ t be visit . ye , cargil , i think you ’ ve hit on someth . i think you ’ ve just thrown open a whole new area of oper for us . tell colonel scheisskopf i want him to work along under your supervis on thi . and send him in to see me when you ’ re through give him instructions. ” “ colonel cargil say you told him you want me to work along under hi supervis on the u.s.o . project , ” colonel scheisskopf complain . “ i told him no such thing , ” answer gener peckem . “ confidenti , scheisskopf , i ’ m not too happi with colonel cargil . he ’ s bossi and he ’ s slow . i ’ d like you to keep a close eye on what he ’ s do and see if you can ’ t get a littl more work out of him. ” “ he keep but in , ” colonel cargil protest . “ he won ’ t let me get ani work done. ” “ there ’ s someth veri funni about scheisskopf , ” gener peckem agre reflect . “ keep a veri close eye on him and see if you can ’ t find out what he ’ s up to. ” “ now he ’ s but into my busi ! ” colonel scheisskopf cri . “ don ’ t let it worri you , scheisskopf , ” said gener peckem , congratul himself on how adeptli he had fit colonel scheisskopf into hi standard method of oper . alreadi hi two colonel were bare on speak term . “ colonel cargil envi you becaus of the splendid job you ’ re do on parad . he ’ s afraid i ’ m go to put you in charg of bomb patterns. ” colonel scheisskopf wa all ear . “ what are bomb pattern ? ” “ bomb pattern ? ” gener peckem repeat , twinkl with self-satisfi good humor . “ a bomb pattern is a term i dream up just sever week ago . it mean noth , but you ’ d be surpris at how rapidli it ’ s caught on . whi , i ’ ve got all sort of peopl convinc i think it ’ s import for the bomb to explod close togeth and make a neat aerial photograph . there ’ s one colonel in pianosa who ’ s hardli concern ani more with whether he hit the target or not . let ’ s fli over and have some fun with him today . it will make colonel cargil jealou , and i learn from wintergreen thi morn that gener dreedl will be off in sardinia . it drive gener dreedl insan to find out i ’ ve been inspect one of hi instal while he ’ s been off inspect anoth . we may even get there in time for the brief . they ’ ll be bomb a tini undefend villag , reduc the whole commun to rubbl . i have it from wintergreen-wintergreen ’ s an ex-serg now , by the way-that the mission is entir unnecessari . it onli purpos is to delay german reinforc at a time when we aren ’ t even plan an offens . but that ’ s the way thing go when you elev mediocr peopl to posit of authority. ” he gestur languidli toward hi gigant map of itali . “ whi , thi tini mountain villag is so insignific that it isn ’ t even there. ” they arriv at colonel cathcart ’ s group too late to attend the preliminari brief and hear major danbi insist , “ but it is there , i tell you . it ’ s there , it ’ s there. ” “ it ’ s where ? ” dunbar demand defiantli , pretend not to see . “ it ’ s right there on the map where thi road make thi slight turn . can ’ t you see thi slight turn on your map ? ” “ no , i can ’ t see it. ” “ i can see it , ” volunt havermey , and mark the spot on dunbar ’ s map . “ and here ’ s a good pictur of the villag right on these photograph . i understand the whole thing . the purpos of the mission is to knock the whole villag slide down the side of the mountain and creat a roadblock that the german will have to clear . is that right ? ” “ that ’ s right , ” said major danbi , mop hi perspir forehead with hi handkerchief . “ i ’ m glad somebodi here is begin to understand . these two armor divis will be come down from austria into itali along thi road . the villag is built on such a steep inclin that all the rubbl from the hous and other build you destroy will certainli tumbl right down and pile upon the road. ” “ what the hell differ will it make ? ” dunbar want to know , as yossarian watch him excitedli with a mixtur of awe and adul . “ it will onli take them a coupl of day to clear it. ” major danbi wa tri to avoid an argument . “ well , it appar make some differ to headquart , ” he answer in a conciliatori tone . “ i suppos that ’ s whi they order the mission. ” “ have the peopl in the villag been warn ? ” ask mcwatt . major danbi wa dismay that mcwatt too wa regist opposit . “ no , i don ’ t think so. ” “ haven ’ t we drop ani leaflet tell them that thi time we ’ ll be fli over to hit them ? ” ask yossarian . “ can ’ t we even tip them off so they ’ ll get out of the way ? ” “ no , i don ’ t think so. ” major danbi wa swear some more and still shift hi eye about uneasili . “ the german might find out and choos anoth road . i ’ m not sure about ani of thi . i ’ m just make assumptions. ” “ they won ’ t even take shelter , ” dunbar argu bitterli . “ they ’ ll pour out into the street to wave when they see our plane come , all the children and dog and old peopl . jesu christ ! whi can ’ t we leav them alon ? ” “ whi can ’ t we creat the roadblock somewher els ? ” ask mcwatt . “ whi must it be there ? ” “ i don ’ t know , ” major danbi answer unhappili . “ i don ’ t know . look , fellow , we ’ ve got to have some confid in the peopl abov us who issu our order . they know what they ’ re doing. ” “ the hell they do , ” said dunbar . “ what ’ s the troubl ? ” inquir colonel korn , move leisur across the brief room with hi hand in hi pocket and hi tan shirt baggi . “ oh , no troubl , colonel , ” said major danbi , tri nervous to cover up . “ we ’ re just discuss the mission. ” “ they don ’ t want to bomb the villag , ” havermey snicker , give major danbi away . “ you prick ! ” yossarian said to havermey . “ you leav havermey alon , ” colonel korn order yossarian curtli . he recogn yossarian as the drunk who had accost him roughli at the offic ’ club one night befor the first mission to bologna , and he swung hi displeasur prudent to dunbar . “ whi don ’ t you want to bomb the villag ? ” “ it ’ s cruel , that ’ s why. ” “ cruel ? ” ask colonel korn with cold good humor , frighten onli momentarili by the uninhibit vehem of dunbar ’ s hostil . “ would it be ani less cruel to let those two german divis down to fight with our troop ? american live are at stake , too , you know . would you rather see american blood spill ? ” “ american blood is be spill . but those peopl are live up there in peac . whi can ’ t we leav them the hell alon ? ” “ ye , it ’ s easi for you to talk , ” colonel korn jeer . “ you ’ re safe here in pianosa . it won ’ t make ani differ to you when these german reinforc arriv , will it ? ” dunbar turn crimson with embarrass and repli in a voic that wa suddenli defens . “ whi can ’ t we creat the roadblock somewher els ? couldn ’ t we bomb the slope of a mountain or the road itself ? ” “ would you rather go back to bologna ? ” the question , ask quietli , rang out like a shot and creat a silenc in the room that wa awkward and menac . yossarian pray intens , with shame , that dunbar would keep hi mouth shut . dunbar drop hi gaze , and colonel korn knew he had won . “ no , i thought not , ” he continu with undisguis scorn . “ you know , colonel cathcart and i have to go to a lot of troubl to get you a milk run like thi . if you ’ d sooner fli mission to bologna , spezia and ferrara , we can get those target with no troubl at all. ” hi eye gleam danger behind hi rimless glass , and hi muddi jowl were squar and hard . “ just let me know. ” “ i would , ” respond havermey eagerli with anoth boast snicker . “ i like to fli into bologna straight and level with my head in the bombsight and listen to all that flak pump away all around me . i get a big kick out of the way the men come charg over to me after the mission and call me dirti name . even the enlist men get sore enough to curs me and want to take sock at me. ” colonel korn chuck havermey under the chin jovial , ignor him , and then address himself to dunbar and yossarian in a dri monoton . “ you ’ ve got my sacr word for it . nobodi is more distress about those lousi wop up in the hill than colonel cathcart and myself . mai c ” est la guerr . tri to rememb that we didn ’ t start the war and itali did . that we weren ’ t the aggressor and itali wa . and that we couldn ’ t possibl inflict as much cruelti on the italian , german , russian and chines as they ’ re alreadi inflict on themselves. ” colonel korn gave major danbi ’ s shoulder a friendli squeez without chang hi unfriendli express . “ carri on with the brief , danbi . and make sure they understand the import of a tight bomb pattern. ” “ oh , no , colonel , ” major danbi blurt out , blink upward . “ not for thi target . i ’ ve told them to space their bomb sixti feet apart so that we ’ ll have a roadblock the full length of the villag instead of in just one spot . it will be a much more effect roadblock with a loos bomb pattern. ” “ we don ’ t care about the roadblock , ” colonel korn inform him . “ colonel cathcart want to come out of thi mission with a good clean aerial photograph he won ’ t be asham to send through channel . don ’ t forget that gener peckem will be here for the full brief , and you know how he feel about bomb pattern . incident , major , you ’ d better hurri up with these detail and clear out befor he get here . gener peckem can ’ t stand you. ” “ oh , no , colonel , ” major danbi correct obligingli . “ it ’ s gener dreedl who can ’ t stand me. ” “ gener peckem can ’ t stand you either . in fact , no one can stand you . finish what you ’ re do , danbi , and disappear . i ’ ll conduct the briefing. ” “ where ’ s major danbi ? ” colonel cathcart inquir , after he had driven up for the full brief with gener peckem and colonel scheisskopf . “ he ask permiss to leav as soon as he saw you drive up , ” answer colonel korn . “ he ’ s afraid gener peckem doesn ’ t like him . i wa go to conduct the brief anyway . i do a much better job. ” “ splendid ! ” said colonel cathcart . “ no ! ” colonel cathcart countermand himself an instant later when he rememb how good a job colonel korn had done befor gener dreedl at the first avignon brief . “ i ’ ll do it myself. ” colonel cathcart brace himself with the knowledg that he wa one of gener peckem ’ s favorit and took charg of the meet , snap hi word out crispli to the attent audienc of subordin offic with the bluff and dispassion tough he had pick up from gener dreedl . he knew he cut a fine figur there on the platform with hi open shirt collar , hi cigarett holder , and hi close-crop , gray-tip curli black hair . he breez along beauti , even emul certain characterist mispronunci of gener dreedl ’ s , and he wa not the least bit intimid by gener peckem ’ s new colonel until he suddenli recal that gener peckem detest gener dreedl . then hi voic crack , and all confid left him . he stumbl ahead through instinct in burn humili . he wa suddenli in terror of colonel scheisskopf . anoth colonel in the area meant anoth rival , anoth enemi , anoth person who hate him . and thi one wa tough ! a horrifi thought occur to colonel cathcart : suppos colonel scheisskopf had alreadi bribe all the men in the room to begin moan , as they had done at the first avignon mission . how could he silenc them ? what a terribl black eye that would be ! colonel cathcart wa seiz with such fright that he almost beckon to colonel korn . somehow he held himself togeth and synchron the watch . when he had done that , he knew he had won , for he could end now at ani time . he had come through in a crisi . he want to laugh in colonel scheisskopf ’ s face with triumph and spite . he had prove himself brilliantli under pressur , and he conclud the brief with an inspir peror that everi instinct told him wa a master exhibit of eloqu tact and subtleti . “ now , men , ” he exhort . “ we have with us today a veri distinguish guest , gener peckem from special servic , the man who give us all our softbal bat , comic book and u.s.o . show . i want to dedic thi mission to him . go on out there and bomb-for me , for your countri , for god , and for that great american , gener p. p. peckem . and let ’ s see you put all those bomb on a dime ! ” 30 dunbar yossarian no longer gave a damn where hi bomb fell , although he did not go as far as dunbar , who drop hi bomb hundr of yard past the villag and would face a court-marti if it could ever be shown he had done it deliber . without a word even to yossarian , dunbar had wash hi hand of the mission . the fall in the hospit had either shown him the light or scrambl hi brain ; it wa imposs to say which . dunbar seldom laugh ani more and seem to be wast away . he snarl belliger at superior offic , even at major danbi , and wa crude and surli and profan even in front of the chaplain , who wa afraid of dunbar now and seem to be wast away also . the chaplain ’ s pilgrimag to wintergreen had prove abort ; anoth shrine wa empti . wintergreen wa too busi to see the chaplain himself . a brash assist brought the chaplain a stolen zippo cigarett lighter as a gift and inform him condescendingli that wintergreen wa too deepli involv with wartim activ to concern himself with matter so trivial as the number of mission men had to fli . the chaplain worri about dunbar and brood more over yossarian now that orr wa gone . to the chaplain , who live by himself in a spaciou tent whose pointi top seal him in gloomi solitud each night like the cap of a tomb , it seem incred that yossarian realli prefer live alon and want no roommat . as a lead bombardi again , yossarian had mcwatt for a pilot , and that wa one consol , although he wa still so utterli undefend . there wa no way to fight back . he could not even see mcwatt and the co-pilot from hi post in the nose . all he could ever see wa aarfi , with whose fustian , moon-fac ineptitud he had final lost all patienc , and there were minut of agon furi and frustrat in the sky when he hunger to be demot again to a wing plane with a load machin gun in the compart instead of the precis bombsight that he realli had no need for , a power , heavi fifty-calib machin gun he could seiz veng in both hand and turn loos savag against all the demon tyrann him : at the smoki black puff of the flak itself ; at the german antiaircraft gunner below whom he could not even see and could not possibl harm with hi machin gun even if he ever did take the time to open fire , at havermey and applebi in the lead plane for their fearless straight and level bomb run on the second mission to bologna where the flak from two hundr and twenty-four cannon had knock out one of orr ’ s engin for the veri last time and sent him down ditch into the sea between genoa and la spezia just befor the brief thunderstorm broke . actual , there wa not much he could do with that power machin gun except load it and test-fir a few round . it wa no more use to him than the bombsight . he could realli cut loos with it against attack german fighter , but there were no german fighter ani more , and he could not even swing it all the way around into the helpless face of pilot like hupl and dobb and order them back down care to the ground , as he had onc order kid sampson back down , which is exactli what he did want to do to dobb and hupl on the hideou first mission to avignon the moment he realiz the fantast pickl he wa in , the moment he found himself aloft in a wing plane with dobb and hupl in a flight head by havermey and applebi . dobb and hupl ? hupl and dobb ? who were they ? what preposter mad to float in thin air two mile high on an inch or two of metal , sustain from death by the meager skill and intellig of two vapid stranger , a beardless kid name hupl and a nervou nut like dobb , who realli did go nut right there in the plane , run amuck over the target without leav hi copilot ’ s seat and grab the control from hupl to plung them all down into that chill dive that tore yossarian ’ s headset loos and brought them right back insid the dens flak from which they had almost escap . the next thing he knew , anoth stranger , a radio-gunn name snowden , wa die in back . it wa imposs to be posit that dobb had kill him , for when yossarian plug hi headset back in , dobb wa alreadi on the intercom plead for someon to go up front and help the bombardi . and almost immedi snowden broke in , whimper , “ help me . pleas help me . i ’ m cold . i ’ m cold. ” and yossarian crawl slowli out of the nose and up on top of the bomb bay and wriggl back into the rear section of the plane-pass the first-aid kit on the way that he had to return for-to treat snowden for the wrong wound , the yawn , raw , melon-shap hole as big as a footbal in the outsid of hi thigh , the unsev , blood-soak muscl fiber insid pulsat weirdli like blind thing with live of their own , the oval , nake wound that wa almost a foot long and made yossarian moan in shock and sympathi the instant he spi it and nearli made him vomit . and the small , slight tail-gunn wa lie on the floor besid snowden in a dead faint , hi face as white as a handkerchief , so that yossarian sprang forward with revuls to help him first . ye , in the long run , he wa much safer fli with mcwatt , and he wa not even safe with mcwatt , who love fli too much and went buzz boldli inch off the ground with yossarian in the nose on the way back from the train flight to break in the new bombardi in the whole replac crew colonel cathcart had obtain after orr wa lost . the practic bomb rang wa on the other side of pianosa , and , fli back , mcwatt edg the belli of the laze , slow-cruis plane just over the crest of mountain in the middl and then , instead of maintain altitud , jolt both engin open all the way , lurch up on one side and , to yossarian ’ s astonish , began follow the fall land down as fast as the plane would go , wag hi wing gaili and skim with a massiv , grind , hammer roar over each rocki rise and dip of the roll terrain like a dizzi gull over wild brown wave . yossarian wa petrifi . the new bombardi besid him sat demur with a bewitch grin and kept whistl “ whee ! ” and yossarian want to reach out and crush hi idiot face with one hand as he flinch and flung himself away from the boulder and hillock and lash branch of tree that loom up abov him out in front and rush past just underneath in a sink , streak blur . no one had a right to take such fright risk with hi life . “ go up , go up , go up ! ” he shout frantic at mcwatt , hate him venom , but mcwatt wa sing buoyantli over the intercom and probabl couldn ’ t hear . yossarian , blaze with rage and almost sob for reveng , hurl himself down into the crawlway and fought hi way through against the drag weight of graviti and inertia until he arriv at the main section and pull himself up to the flight deck , to stand trembl behind mcwatt in the pilot ’ s seat . he look desper about for a gun , a gray-black.45 automat that he could cock and ram right up against the base of mcwatt ’ s skull . there wa no gun . there wa no hunt knife either , and no other weapon with which he could bludgeon or stab , and yossarian grasp and jerk the collar of mcwatt ’ s coveral in tighten fist and shout to him to go up , go up . the land wa still swim by underneath and flash by overhead on both side . mcwatt look back at yossarian and laugh joy as though yossarian were share hi fun . yossarian slid both hand around mcwatt ’ s bare throat and squeez . mcwatt turn stiff : “ go up , ” yossarian order unmistak through hi teeth in a low , menac voic . “ or i ’ ll kill you. ” rigid with caution , mcwatt cut the motor back and climb gradual . yossarian ’ s hand weaken on mcwatt ’ s neck and slid down off hi shoulder to dangl inertli . he wa not angri ani more . he wa asham . when mcwatt turn , he wa sorri the hand were hi and wish there were someplac where he could buri them . they felt dead . mcwatt gaze at him deepli . there wa no friendli in hi stare . “ boy , ” he said coldli , “ you sure must be in pretti bad shape . you ought to go home. ” “ they won ’ t let me. ” yossarian answer with avert eye , and crept away . yossarian step down from the flight deck and seat himself on the floor , hang hi head with guilt and remors . he wa cover with sweat . mcwatt set cours directli back toward the field . yossarian wonder whether mcwatt would now go to the oper tent to see piltchard and wren and request that yossarian never be assign to hi plane again , just as yossarian had gone surreptiti to speak to them about dobb and hupl and orr and , unsuccess , about aarfi . he had never seen mcwatt look displeas befor , had never seen him in ani but the most lightheart mood , and he wonder whether he had just lost anoth friend . but mcwatt wink at him reassuringli as he climb down from the plane and josh hospit with the credul new pilot and bombardi dure the jeep ride back to the squadron , although he did not address a word to yossarian until all four had return their parachut and separ and the two of them were walk side by side toward their own row of tent . then mcwatt ’ s spars freckl tan scotch-irish face broke suddenli into a smile and he dug hi knuckl play into yossarian ’ s rib , as though throw a punch . “ you lous , ” he laugh . “ were you realli go to kill me up there ? ” yossarian grin penit and shook hi head . “ no . i don ’ t think so. ” “ i didn ’ t realiz you got it so bad . boy ! whi don ’ t you talk to somebodi about it ? ” “ i talk to everybodi about it . what the hell ’ s the matter with you ? don ’ t you ever hear me ? ” “ i guess i never realli believ you. ” “ aren ’ t you ever afraid ? ” “ mayb i ought to be. ” “ not even on the mission ? ” “ i guess i just don ’ t have brain enough. ” mcwatt laugh sheepishli . “ there are so mani way for me to get kill , ” yossarian comment , “ and you had to find one more. ” mcwatt smile again . “ say , i bet it must realli scare you when i buzz your tent , huh ? ” “ it scare me to death . i ’ ve told you that. ” “ i thought it wa just the nois you were complain about. ” mcwatt made a resign shrug . “ oh , well , what the hell , ” he sang . “ i guess i ’ ll just have to give it up. ” but mcwatt wa incorrig , and , while he never buzz yossarian ’ s tent again , he never miss an opportun to buzz the beach and roar like a fierc and low-fli thunderbolt over the raft in the water and the seclud hollow in the sand where yossarian lay feel up nurs duckett or play heart , poker or pinochl with nate , dunbar and hungri joe . yossarian met nurs duckett almost everi afternoon that both were free and came with her to the beach on the other side of the narrow swell of shoulder-high dune separ them from the area in which the other offic and enlist men went swim nude . nate , dunbar and hungri joe would come there , too . mcwatt would occasion join them , and often aarfi , who alway arriv pudgili in full uniform and never remov ani of hi cloth but hi shoe and hi hat ; aarfi never went swim . the other men wore swim trunk in defer to nurs duckett , and in defer also to nurs cramer , who accompani nurs duckett and yossarian to the beach everi time and sat haughtili by herself ten yard away . no one but aarfi ever made refer to the nake men sun-bath in full view farther down the beach or jump and dive from the enorm white-wash raft that bob on empti oil drum out beyond the silt sand . nurs cramer sat by herself becaus she wa angri with yossarian and disappoint in nurs duckett . nurs sue ann duckett despis aarfi , and that wa anoth one of the numer fetch trait about nurs duckett that yossarian enjoy . he enjoy nurs sue ann duckett ’ s long white leg and suppl , callipyg ass ; he often neglect to rememb that she wa quit slim and fragil from the waist up and hurt her unintent in moment of passion when he hug her too roughli . he love her manner of sleepi acquiesc when they lay on the beach at dusk . he drew solac and sedat from her near . he had a crave to touch her alway , to remain alway in physic commun . he like to encircl her ankl loos with hi finger as he play card with nate , dunbar and hungri joe , to lightli and lovingli caress the downi skin of her fair , smooth thigh with the back of hi nail or , dreamili , sensuous , almost unconsci , slide hi proprietari , respect hand up the shell-lik ridg of her spine beneath the elast strap of the top of the two-piec bath suit she alway wore to contain and cover her tini , long-nippl breast . he love nurs duckett ’ s seren , flatter respons , the sens of attach to him she display proudli . hungri joe had a crave to feel nurs duckett up , too , and wa restrain more than onc by yossarian ’ s forbid glower . nurs duckett flirt with hungri joe just to keep him in heat , and her round light-brown eye glimmer with mischief everi time yossarian rap her sharpli with hi elbow or fist to make her stop . the men play card on a towel , undershirt , or blanket , and nurs duckett mix the extra deck of card , sit with her back rest against a sand dune . when she wa not shuffl the extra deck of card , she sat squint into a tini pocket mirror , brush mascara on her curl reddish eyelash in a birdbrain effort to make them longer perman . occasion she wa abl to stack the card or spoil the deck in a way they did not discov until they were well into the game , and she laugh and glow with bliss gratif when they all hurl their card down disgustedli and began punch her sharpli on the arm or leg as they call her filthi name and warn her to stop fool around . she would prattl nonsens when they were strive hardest to think , and a pink flush of elat crept into her cheek when they gave her more sharp rap on the arm and leg with their fist and told her to shut up . nurs duckett revel in such attent and duck her short chestnut bang with joy when yossarian and the other focus upon her . it gave her a peculiar feel of warm and expect well-b to know that so mani nake boy and men were idl close by on the other side of the sand dune . she had onli to stretch her neck or rise on some pretext to see twenti or forti undress male loung or play ball in the sunlight . her own bodi wa such a familiar and unremark thing to her that she wa puzzl by the convuls ecstasi men could take from it , by the intens and amus need they had mere to touch it , to reach out urgent and press it , squeez it , pinch it , rub it . she did not understand yossarian ’ s lust ; but she wa will to take hi word for it . even when yossarian felt horni he brought nurs duckett to the beach with two blanket and enjoy make love to her with most of their cloth on more than he sometim enjoy make love to all the vigor bare amor girl in rome . frequent they went to the beach at night and did not make love , but just lay shiver between the blanket against each other to ward off the brisk , damp chill . the ink-black night were turn cold , the star frosti and fewer . the raft sway in the ghostli trail of moonlight and seem to be sail away . a mark hint of cold weather penetr the air . other men were just start to build stove and came to yossarian ’ s tent dure the day to marvel at orr ’ s workmanship . it thrill nurs duckett raptur that yossarian could not keep hi hand off her when they were togeth , although she would not let him slip them insid her bath short dure the day when anyon wa near enough to see , not even when the onli wit wa nurs cramer , who sat on the other side of her sand dune with her reprov nose in the air and pretend not to see anyth . nurs cramer had stop speak to nurs duckett , her best friend , becaus of her liaison with yossarian , but still went everywher with nurs duckett sinc nurs duckett wa her best friend . she did not approv of yossarian or hi friend . when they stood up and went swim with nurs duckett , nurs cramer stood up and went swim , too , maintain the same ten-yard distanc between them , and maintain her silenc , snub them even in the water . when they laugh and splash , she laugh and splash ; when they dive , she dive ; when they swam to the sand bar and rest , nurs cramer swam to the sand bar and rest . when they came out , she came out , dri her shoulder with her own towel and seat herself aloofli in her own spot , her back rigid and a ring of reflect sunlight burnish her light-blond hair like a halo . nurs cramer wa prepar to begin talk to nurs duckett again if she repent and apolog . nurs duckett prefer thing the way they were . for a long time she had want to give nurs cramer a rap to make her shut up . nurs duckett found yossarian wonder and wa alreadi tri to chang him . she love to watch him take short nap with hi face down and hi arm thrown across her , or stare bleakli at the endless tame , quiet wave break like pet puppi dog against the shore , scamper lightli up the sand a foot or two and then trot away . she wa calm in hi silenc . she knew she did not bore him , and she buf or paint her fingernail studious while he doze or brood and the desultori warm afternoon breez vibrat delic on the surfac of the beach . she love to look at hi wide , long , sinewi back with it bronz , unblemish skin . she love to bring him to flame instantli by take hi whole ear in her mouth suddenli and run her hand down hi front all the way . she love to make him burn and suffer till dark , then satisfi him . then kiss him adoringli becaus she had brought him such bliss . yossarian wa never lone with nurs duckett , who realli did know how to keep her mouth shut and wa just caprici enough . he wa haunt and torment by the vast , boundless ocean . he wonder mourn , as nurs duckett buf her nail , about all the peopl who had die under water . there were sure more than a million alreadi . where were they ? what insect had eaten their flesh ? he imagin the aw impot of breath in helplessli quart and quart of water . yossarian follow the small fish boat and militari launch pli back and forth far out and found them unreal ; it did not seem true that there were full-siz men aboard , go somewher everi time . he look toward stoni elba , and hi eye automat search overhead for the fluffi , white , turnip-shap cloud in which cleving had vanish . he peer at the vapor italian skylin and thought of orr . cleving and orr . where had they gone ? yossarian had onc stood on a jetti at dawn and watch a tuft round log that wa drift toward him on the tide turn unexpectedli into the bloat face of a drown man ; it wa the first dead person he had ever seen . he thirst for life and reach out raven to grasp and hold nurs duckett ’ s flesh . he studi everi float object fear for some gruesom sign of cleving and orr , prepar for ani morbid shock but the shock mcwatt gave him one day with the plane that came blast suddenli into sight out of the distant still and hurtl mercilessli along the shore line with a great growl , clatter roar over the bob raft on which blond , pale kid sampson , hi nake side scrawni even from so far away , leap clownishli up to touch it at the exact moment some arbitrari gust of wind or minor miscalcul of mcwatt ’ s sens drop the speed plane down just low enough for a propel to slice him half away . even peopl who were not there rememb vividli exactli what happen next . there wa the briefest , softest tsst ! filter audibl through the shatter , overwhelm howl of the plane ’ s engin , and then there were just kid sampson ’ s two pale , skinni leg , still join by string somehow at the bloodi truncat hip , stand stock-stil on the raft for what seem a full minut or two befor they toppl over backward into the water final with a faint , echo splash and turn complet upsid down so that onli the grotesqu toe and the plaster-whit sole of kid sampson ’ s feet remain in view . on the beach , all hell broke loos . nurs cramer materi out of thin air suddenli and wa weep hyster against yossarian ’ s chest while yossarian hug her shoulder and sooth her . hi other arm bolster nurs duckett , who wa trembl and sob against him , too , her long , angular face dead white . everyon at the beach wa scream and run , and the men sound like women . they scamper for their thing in panic , stoop hurriedli and look askanc at each gentl , knee-high wave bubbl in as though some ugli , red , grisli organ like a liver or a lung might come wash right up against them . those in the water were struggl to get out , forget in their hast to swim , wail , walk , held back in their flight by the viscou , cling sea as though by a bite wind . kid sampson had rain all over . those who spi drop of him on their limb or torso drew back with terror and revuls , as though tri to shrink away from their own odiou skin . everybodi ran in a sluggish stamped , shoot tortur , horrifi glanc back , fill the deep , shadowi , rustl wood with their frail gasp and cri . yossarian drove both stumbl , falter women befor him frantic , shove them and prod them to make them hurri , and race back with a curs to help when hungri joe trip on the blanket or the camera case he wa carri and fell forward on hi face in the mud of the stream . back at the squadron everyon alreadi knew . men in uniform were scream and run there too , or stand motionless in one spot , root in awe , like sergeant knight and doc daneeka as they grave crane their head upward and watch the guilti , bank , forlorn airplan with mcwatt circl and circl slowli and climb . “ who is it ? ” yossarian shout anxious at doc daneeka as he ran up , breathless and limp , hi somber eye burn with a misti , hectic anguish . “ who ’ s in the plane ? ” “ mcwatt , ” said sergeant knight . “ he ’ s got the two new pilot with him on a train flight . doc daneeka ’ s up there , too. ” “ i ’ m right here , ” contend doc daneeka , in a strang and troubl voic , dart an anxiou look at sergeant knight . “ whi doesn ’ t he come down ? ” yossarian exclaim in despair . “ whi doe he keep go up ? ” “ he ’ s probabl afraid to come down , ” sergeant knight answer , without move hi solemn gaze from mcwatt ’ s solitari climb airplan . “ he know what kind of troubl he ’ s in. ” and mcwatt kept climb higher and higher , nose hi drone airplan upward evenli in a slow , oval spiral that carri him far out over the water as he head south and far in over the russet foothil when he had circl the land field again and wa fli north . he wa soon up over five thousand feet . hi engin were soft as whisper . a white parachut pop open suddenli in a surpris puff . a second parachut pop open a few minut later and coast down , like the first , directli in toward the clear of the land strip . there wa no motion on the ground . the plane continu south for thirti second more , follow the same pattern , familiar and predict now , and mcwatt lift a wing and bank grace around into hi turn . “ two more to go , ” said sergeant knight . “ mcwatt and doc daneeka. ” “ i ’ m right here , sergeant knight , ” doc daneeka told him plaintiv . “ i ’ m not in the plane. ” “ whi don ’ t they jump ? ” sergeant knight ask , plead aloud to himself . “ whi don ’ t they jump ? ” “ it doesn ’ t make sens , ” griev doc daneeka , bite hi lip . “ it just doesn ’ t make sense. ” but yossarian understood suddenli whi mcwatt wouldn ’ t jump , and went run uncontrol down the whole length of the squadron after mcwatt ’ s plane , wave hi arm and shout up at him imploringli to come down , mcwatt , come down ; but no one seem to hear , certainli not mcwatt , and a great , choke moan tore from yossarian ’ s throat as mcwatt turn again , dip hi wing onc in salut , decid oh , well , what the hell , and flew into a mountain . colonel cathcart wa so upset by the death of kid sampson and mcwatt that he rais the mission to sixty-f . 31 mrs. daneeka when colonel cathcart learn that doc daneeka too had been kill in mcwatt ’ s plane , he increas the number of mission to seventi . the first person in the squadron to find out that doc daneeka wa dead wa sergeant towser , who had been inform earlier by the man in the control tower that doc daneeka ’ s name wa down as a passeng on the pilot ’ s manifest mcwatt had file befor take off . sergeant towser brush away a tear and struck doc daneeka ’ s name from the roster of squadron personnel . with lip still quiver , he rose and trudg outsid reluctantli to break the bad news to gu and we , discreetli avoid ani convers with doc daneeka himself as he move by the flight surgeon ’ s slight sepulchr figur roost despond on hi stool in the late-afternoon sunlight between the orderli room and the medic tent . sergeant towser ’ s heart wa heavi ; now he had two dead men on hi hands-mudd , the dead man in yossarian ’ s tent who wasn ’ t even there , and doc daneeka , the new dead man in the squadron , who most certainli wa there and gave everi indic of prove a still thornier administr problem for him . gu and we listen to sergeant towser with look of stoic surpris and said not a word about their bereav to anyon els until doc daneeka himself came in about an hour afterward to have hi temperatur taken for the third time that day and hi blood pressur check . the thermomet regist a half degre lower than hi usual subnorm temperatur of 96.8 . doc daneeka wa alarm . the fix , vacant , wooden stare of hi two enlist men were even more irrit than alway . “ goddammit , ” he expostul polit in an uncommon excess of exasper , “ what ’ s the matter with you two men anyway ? it just isn ’ t right for a person to have a low temperatur all the time and walk around with a stuf nose. ” doc daneeka emit a glum , self-piti sniff and stroll disconsol across the tent to help himself to some aspirin and sulphur pill and paint hi own throat with argyrol . hi downcast face wa fragil and forlorn as a swallow ’ s , and he rub the back of hi arm rhythmic . “ just look how cold i am right now . you ’ re sure you ’ re not hold anyth back ? ” “ you ’ re dead , sir , ” one of hi two enlist men explain . doc daneeka jerk hi head up quickli with resent distrust . “ what ’ s that ? ” “ you ’ re dead , sir , ” repeat the other . “ that ’ s probabl the reason you alway feel so cold. ” “ that ’ s right , sir . you ’ ve probabl been dead all thi time and we just didn ’ t detect it. ” “ what the hell are you both talk about ? ” doc daneeka cri shrilli with a surg , petrifi sensat of some onrush unavoid disast . “ it ’ s true , sir , ” said one of the enlist men . “ the record show that you went up in mcwatt ’ s plane to collect some flight time . you didn ’ t come down in a parachut , so you must have been kill in the crash. ” “ that ’ s right , sir , ” said the other . “ you ought to be glad you ’ ve got ani temperatur at all. ” doc daneeka ’ s mind wa reel in confus . “ have you both gone crazi ? ” he demand . “ i ’ m go to report thi whole insubordin incid to sergeant towser. ” “ sergeant towser ’ s the one who told us about it , ” said either gu or we . “ the war depart ’ s even go to notifi your wife. ” doc daneeka yelp and ran out of the medic tent to remonstr with sergeant towser , who edg away from him with repugn and advis doc daneeka to remain out of sight as much as possibl until some decis could be reach relat to the disposit of hi remain . “ gee , i guess he realli is dead , ” griev one of hi enlist men in a low , respect voic . “ i ’ m go to miss him . he wa a pretti wonder guy , wasn ’ t he ? ” “ yeah , he sure wa , ” mourn the other . “ but i ’ m glad the littl fuck is gone . i wa get sick and tire of take hi blood pressur all the time. ” mrs. daneeka , doc daneeka ’ s wife , wa not glad that doc daneeka wa gone and split the peac staten island night with woeful shriek of lament when she learn by war depart telegram that her husband had been kill in action . women came to comfort her , and their husband paid condol call and hope inwardli that she would soon move to anoth neighborhood and spare them the oblig of continu sympathi . the poor woman wa total distraught for almost a full week . slowli , heroic , she found the strength to contempl a futur fill with dire problem for herself and her children . just as she wa grow resign to her loss , the postman rang with a bolt from the blue-a letter from oversea that wa sign with her husband ’ s signatur and urg her frantic to disregard ani bad news concern him . mrs. daneeka wa dumbfound . the date on the letter wa illeg . the handwrit throughout wa shaki and hurri , but the style resembl her husband ’ s and the melancholi , self-piti tone wa familiar , although more dreari than usual . mrs. daneeka wa overjoy and wept irrepress with relief and kiss the crinkl , grubbi tissu of v-mail stationeri a thousand time . she dash a grate note off to her husband press him for detail and sent a wire inform the war depart of it error . the war depart repli touchili that there had been no error and that she wa undoubtedli the victim of some sadist and psychot forger in her husband ’ s squadron . the letter to her husband wa return unopen , stamp kill in action . mrs. daneeka had been widow cruelli again , but thi time her grief wa mitig somewhat by a notif from washington that she wa sole beneficiari of her husband ’ s $ 10,000 gi insur polici , which amount wa obtain by her on demand . the realiz that she and the children were not face immedi with starvat brought a brave smile to her face and mark the turn point in her distress . the veteran administr inform her by mail the veri next day that she would be entitl to pension benefit for the rest of her natur life becaus of her husband ’ s demis , and to a burial allow for him of $ 250 . a govern check for $ 250 wa enclos . gradual , inexor , her prospect brighten . a letter arriv that same week from the social secur administr state that , under the provis of the old age and survivor insur act of 1935 , she would receiv monthli support for herself and her depend children until they reach the age of eighteen , and a burial allow of $ 250 . with these govern letter as proof of death , she appli for payment on three life insur polici doc daneeka had carri , with a valu of $ 50,000 each ; her claim wa honor and process swiftli . each day brought new unexpect treasur . a key to a safe-deposit box led to a fourth life insur polici with a face valu of $ 50,000 , and to $ 18,000 in cash on which incom tax had never been paid and need never be paid . a fratern lodg to which he had belong gave her a cemeteri plot . a second fratern organ of which he had been a member sent her a burial allow of $ 250 . hi counti medic associ gave her a burial allow of $ 250 . the husband of her closest friend began to flirt with her . mrs. daneeka wa simpli delight with the way thing were turn out and had her hair dy . her fantast wealth just kept pile up , and she had to remind herself daili that all the hundr of thousand of dollar she wa acquir were not worth a singl penni without her husband to share thi good fortun with her . it astonish her that so mani separ organ were will to do so much to buri doc daneeka , who , back in pianosa , wa have a terribl time tri to keep hi head abov the ground and wonder with dismal apprehens whi hi wife did not answer the letter he had written . he found himself ostrac in the squadron by men who curs hi memori foulli for have suppli colonel cathcart with provoc to rais the number of combat mission . record attest to hi death were pullul like insect egg and verifi each other beyond all content . he drew no pay or px ration and depend for life on the chariti of sergeant towser and milo , who both knew he wa dead . colonel cathcart refus to see him , and colonel korn sent word through major danbi that he would have doc daneeka cremat on the spot if he ever show up at group headquart . major danbi confid that group wa incens with all flight surgeon becaus of dr. stubb , the bushy-hair , baggy-chin , slovenli flight surgeon in dunbar ’ s squadron who wa deliber and defiantli brew insidi dissens there by ground all men with sixti mission on proper form that were reject by group indignantli with order restor the confus pilot , navig , bombardi and gunner to combat duti . moral there wa eb rapidli , and dunbar wa under surveil . group wa glad doc daneeka had been kill and did not intend to ask for a replac . not even the chaplain could bring doc daneeka back to life under the circumst . alarm chang to resign , and more and more doc daneeka acquir the look of an ail rodent . the sack under hi eye turn hollow and black , and he pad through the shadow fruitlessli like a ubiquit spook . even captain flume recoil when doc daneeka sought him out in the wood for help . heartlessli , gu and we turn him away from their medic tent without even a thermomet for comfort , and then , onli then , did he realiz that , to all intent and purpos , he realli wa dead , and that he had better do someth damn fast if he ever hope to save himself . there wa nowher els to turn but to hi wife , and he scribbl an impass letter beg her to bring hi plight to the attent of the war depart and urg her to commun at onc with hi group command , colonel cathcart , for assur that-no matter what els she might have heard-it wa inde he , her husband , doc daneeka , who wa plead with her , and not a corps or some impostor . mrs. daneeka wa stun by the depth of emot in the almost illeg appeal . she wa torn with compunct and tempt to compli , but the veri next letter she open that day wa from that same colonel cathcart , her husband ’ s group command , and began : dear mrs. , mr. , miss , or mr. and mrs. daneeka : word can not express the deep person grief i experienc when your husband , son , father or brother wa kill , wound or report miss in action . mrs. daneeka move with her children to lans , michigan , and left no forward address . 32 yo-yo ’ s roomi yossarian wa warm when the cold weather came and whale-shap cloud blew low through a dingi , slate-gray sky , almost without end , like the drone , dark , iron flock of b-17 and b-24 bomber from the long-rang air base in itali the day of the invas of southern franc two month earlier . everyon in the squadron knew that kid sampson ’ s skinni leg had wash up on the wet sand to lie there and rot like a purpl twist wishbon . no one would go to retriev them , not gu or we or even the men in the mortuari at the hospit ; everyon made believ that kid sampson ’ s leg were not there , that they had bob away south forev on the tide like all of cleving and orr . now that bad weather had come , almost no one ever sneak away alon ani more to peek through bush like a pervert at the molder stump . there were no more beauti day . there were no more easi mission . there wa sting rain and dull , chill fog , and the men flew at week-long interv , whenev the weather clear . at night the wind moan . the gnarl and stunt tree trunk creak and groan and forc yossarian ’ s thought each morn , even befor he wa fulli awak , back on kid sampson ’ s skinni leg bloat and decay , as systemat as a tick clock , in the ici rain and wet sand all through the blind , cold , gusti octob night . after kid sampson ’ s leg , he would think of piti , whimper snowden freez to death in the rear section of the plane , hold hi etern , immut secret conceal insid hi quilt , armor-pl flak suit until yossarian had finish steril and bandag the wrong wound on hi leg , and then spill it out suddenli all over the floor . at night when he wa tri to sleep , yossarian would call the roll of all the men , women and children he had ever known who were now dead . he tri to rememb all the soldier , and he resurrect imag of all the elderli peopl he had known when a child-al the aunt , uncl , neighbor , parent and grandpar , hi own and everyon els ’ s , and all the pathet , delud shopkeep who open their small , dusti store at dawn and work in them foolishli until midnight . they were all dead , too . the number of dead peopl just seem to increas . and the german were still fight . death wa irrevers , he suspect , and he began to think he wa go to lose . yossarian wa warm when the cold weather came becaus of orr ’ s marvel stove , and he might have exist in hi warm tent quit comfort if not for the memori of orr , and if not for the gang of anim roommat that came swarm insid rapaci one day from the two full combat crew colonel cathcart had requisitioned-and obtain in less than forty-eight hours-a replac for kid sampson and mcwatt . yossarian emit a long , loud , croak gasp of protest when he trudg in tiredli after a mission and found them alreadi there . there were four of them , and they were have a whale of a good time as they help each other set up their cot . they were hors around . the moment he saw them , yossarian knew they were imposs . they were friski , eager and exuber , and they had all been friend in the state . they were plainli unthink . they were noisi , overconfid , empty-head kid of twenty-on . they had gone to colleg and were engag to pretti , clean girl whose pictur were alreadi stand on the rough cement mantelpiec of orr ’ s fireplac . they had ridden in speedboat and play tenni . they had been horseback ride . one had onc been to bed with an older woman . they knew the same peopl in differ part of the countri and had gone to school with each other ’ s cousin . they had listen to the world seri and realli care who won footbal game . they were obtus ; their moral wa good . they were glad that the war had last long enough for them to find out what combat wa realli like . they were halfway through unpack when yossarian threw them out . they were plainli out of the question , yossarian explain adamantli to sergeant towser , whose sallow equin face wa despond as he inform yossarian that the new offic would have to be admit . sergeant towser wa not permit to requisit anoth six-man tent from group while yossarian wa live in one alon . “ i ’ m not live in thi one alon , ” yossarian said with a sulk . “ i ’ ve got a dead man in here with me . hi name is mudd. ” “ pleas , sir , ” beg sergeant towser , sigh wearili , with a sidelong glanc at the four baffl new offic listen in mystifi silenc just outsid the entranc . “ mudd wa kill on the mission to orvieto . you know that . he wa fli right besid you. ” “ then whi don ’ t you move hi thing out ? ” “ becaus he never even got here . captain , pleas don ’ t bring that up again . you can move in with lieuten nate if you like . i ’ ll even send some men from the orderli room to transfer your belongings. ” but to abandon orr ’ s tent would be to abandon orr , who would have been spurn and humili clannishli by these four simple-mind offic wait to move in . it did not seem just that these boister , immatur young men should show up after all the work wa done and be allow to take possess of the most desir tent on the island . but that wa the law , sergeant towser explain , and all yossarian could do wa glare at them in bale apolog as he made room for them and volunt help penit hint as they move insid hi privaci and made themselv at home . they were the most depress group of peopl yossarian had ever been with . they were alway in high spirit . they laugh at everyth . they call him “ yo-yo ” jocularli and came in tipsi late at night and woke him up with their clumsi , bump , giggl effort to be quiet , then bombard him with asinin shout of hilari good-fellowship when he sat up curs to complain . he want to massacr them each time they did . they remind him of donald duck ’ s nephew . they were afraid of yossarian and persecut him incessantli with nag generos and with their exasper insist on do small favor for him . they were reckless , pueril , congeni , naiv , presumptu , deferenti and rambuncti . they were dumb ; they had no complaint . they admir colonel cathcart and they found colonel korn witti . they were afraid of yossarian , but they were not the least bit afraid of colonel cathcart ’ s seventi mission . they were four clean-cut kid who were have lot of fun , and they were drive yossarian nut . he could not make them understand that he wa a crotcheti old fogey of twenty-eight , that he belong to anoth gener , anoth era , anoth world , that have a good time bore him and wa not worth the effort , and that they bore him , too . he could not make them shut up ; they were wors than women . they had not brain enough to be introvert and repress . croni of their in other squadron began drop in unashamedli and use the tent as a hangout . there wa often not room enough for him . worst of all , he could no longer bring nurs duckett there to lie down with her . and now that foul weather had come , he had no place els ! thi wa a calam he had not foreseen , and he want to bust hi roommat ’ head open with hi fist or pick them up , each in turn , by the seat of their pant and the scruff of their neck and pitch them out onc and for all into the dank , rubberi perenni weed grow between hi rusti soupcan urin with nail hole in the bottom and the knotty-pin squadron latrin that stood like a beach locker not far away . instead of bust their head open , he tramp in hi galosh and black raincoat through the drizzl dark to invit chief white halfoat to move in with him , too , and drive the fastidi , clean-liv bastard out with hi threat and swinish habit . but chief white halfoat felt cold and wa alreadi make plan to move up into the hospit to die of pneumonia . instinct told chief white halfoat it wa almost time . hi chest ach and he cough chronic . whiskey no longer warm him . most damn of all , captain flume had move back into hi trailer . here wa an omen of unmistak mean . “ he had to move back , ” yossarian argu in a vain effort to cheer up the glum , barrel-chest indian , whose well-knit sorrel-r face had degener rapidli into a dilapid , calcar gray . “ he ’ d die of exposur if he tri to live in the wood in thi weather. ” “ no , that wouldn ’ t drive the yellowbelli back , ” chief white halfoat disagre obstin . he tap hi forehead with cryptic insight . “ no , sirre . he know someth . he know it ’ s time for me to die of pneumonia , that ’ s what he know . and that ’ s how i know it ’ s time. ” “ what doe doc daneeka say ? ” “ i ’ m not allow to say anyth , ” doc daneeka said sorrow from hi seat on hi stool in the shadow of a corner , hi smooth , taper , diminut face turtle-green in the flicker candlelight . everyth smell of mildew . the bulb in the tent had blown out sever day befor , and neither of the two men had been abl to muster the initi to replac it . “ i ’ m not allow to practic medicin ani more , ” doc daneeka ad . “ he ’ s dead , ” chief white halfoat gloat , with a hors laugh entangl in phlegm . “ that ’ s realli funny. ” “ i don ’ t even draw my pay ani more. ” “ that ’ s realli funni , ” chief white halfoat repeat . “ all thi time he ’ s been insult my liver , and look what happen to him . he ’ s dead . kill by hi own greed. ” “ that ’ s not what kill me , ” doc daneeka observ in a voic that wa calm and flat . “ there ’ s noth wrong with greed . it ’ s all that lousi dr. stubb ’ fault , get colonel cathcart and colonel korn stir up against flight surgeon . he ’ s go to give the medic profess a bad name by stand up for principl . if he ’ s not care , he ’ ll be black-bal by hi state medic associ and kept out of the hospitals. ” yossarian watch chief white halfoat pour whiskey care into three empti shampoo bottl and store them away in the musett bag he wa pack . “ can ’ t you stop by my tent on your way up to the hospit and punch one of them in the nose for me ? ” he specul aloud . “ i ’ ve got four of them , and they ’ re go to crowd me out of my tent altogether. ” “ you know , someth like that onc happen to my whole tribe , ” chief white halfoat remark in jolli appreci , sit back on hi cot to chuckl . “ whi don ’ t you get captain black to kick those kid out ? captain black like to kick peopl out. ” yossarian grimac sourli at the mere mention of captain black , who wa alreadi bulli the new flier each time they step into hi intellig tent for map or inform . yossarian ’ s attitud toward hi roommat turn merci and protect at the mere recollect of captain black . it wa not their fault that they were young and cheer , he remind himself as he carri the swing beam of hi flashlight back through the dark . he wish that he could be young and cheer , too . and it wasn ’ t their fault that they were courag , confid and carefre . he would just have to be patient with them until one or two were kill and the rest wound , and then they would all turn out okay . he vow to be more toler and benevol , but when he duck insid hi tent with hi friendlier attitud a great blaze wa roar in the fireplac , and he gasp in horrifi amaz . orr ’ s beauti birch log were go up in smoke ! hi roommat had set fire to them ! he gape at the four insensit overh face and want to shout curs at them . he want to bang their head togeth as they greet him with loud convivi cri and invit him gener to pull up a chair and eat their chestnut and roast potato . what could he do with them ? and the veri next morn they got rid of the dead man in hi tent ! just like that , they whisk him away ! they carri hi cot and all hi belong right out into the bush and simpli dump them there , and then they strode back slap their hand briskli at a job well done . yossarian wa stun by their overbear vigor and zeal , by their practic , direct effici . in a matter of moment they had dispos energet of a problem with which yossarian and sergeant towser had been grappl unsuccess for month . yossarian wa alarmed-they might get rid of him just as quickli , he feared-and ran to hungri joe and fled with him to rome the day befor nate ’ s whore final got a good night ’ s sleep and woke up in love . 33 nate ’ s whore he miss nurs duckett in rome . there wa not much els to do after hungri joe left on hi mail run . yossarian miss nurs duckett so much that he went search hungrili through the street for luciana , whose laugh and invis scar he had never forgotten , or the boozi , blowzi , bleary-ey floozi in the overload white brassièr and unbutton orang satin blous whose naughti salmon-color cameo ring aarfi had thrown away so callous through the window of her car . how he yearn for both girl ! he look for them in vain . he wa so deepli in love with them , and he knew he would never see either again . despair gnaw at him . vision beset him . he want nurs duckett with her dress up and her slim thigh bare to the hip . he bang a thin streetwalk with a wet cough who pick him up from an alley between hotel , but that wa no fun at all and he hasten to the enlist men ’ s apart for the fat , friendli maid in the lime-color panti , who wa overjoy to see him but couldn ’ t arous him . he went to bed there earli and slept alon . he woke up disappoint and bang a sassi , short , chubbi girl he found in the apart after breakfast , but that wa onli a littl better , and he chase her away when he ’ d finish and went back to sleep . he nap till lunch and then went shop for present for nurs duckett and a scarf for the maid in the lime-colour panti , who hug him with such gargantuan gratitud that he wa soon hot for nurs duckett and ran look lecher for luciana again . instead he found aarfi , who had land in rome when hungri joe return with dunbar , nate and dobb , and who would not go along on the drunken foray that night to rescu nate ’ s whore from the middle-ag militari big shot hold her captiv in a hotel becaus she would not say uncl . “ whi should i risk get into troubl just to help her out ? ” aarfi demand haughtili . “ but don ’ t tell nate i said that . tell him i had to keep an appoint with some veri import fratern brothers. ” the middle-ag big shot would not let nate ’ s whore leav until they made her say uncl . “ say uncl , ” they said to her . “ uncl , ” she said . “ no , no . say uncle. ” “ uncl , ” she said . “ she still doesn ’ t understand. ” “ you still don ’ t understand , do you ? we can ’ t realli make you say uncl unless you don ’ t want to say uncl . don ’ t you see ? don ’ t say uncl when i tell you to say uncl . okay ? say uncle. ” “ uncl , ” she said . “ no , don ’ t say uncl . say uncle. ” she didn ’ t say uncl . “ that ’ s good ! ” “ that ’ s veri good. ” “ it ’ s a start . now say uncle. ” “ uncl , ” she said . “ it ’ s no good. ” “ no , it ’ s no good that way either . she just isn ’ t impress with us . there ’ s just no fun make her say uncl when she doesn ’ t care whether we make her say uncl or not. ” “ no , she realli doesn ’ t care , doe she ? say ‘ foot. ’ ” “ foot. ” “ you see ? she doesn ’ t care about anyth we do . she doesn ’ t care about us . we don ’ t mean a thing to you , do we ? ” “ uncl , ” she said . she didn ’ t care about them a bit , and it upset them terribl . they shook her roughli each time she yawn . she did not seem to care about anyth , not even when they threaten to throw her out the window . they were utterli demor men of distinct . she wa bore and indiffer and want veri much to sleep . she had been on the job for twenty-two hour , and she wa sorri that these men had not permit her to leav with the other two girl with whom the orgi had begun . she wonder vagu whi they want her to laugh when they laugh , and whi they want her to enjoy it when they made love to her . it wa all veri mysteri to her , and veri uninterest . she wa not sure what they want from her . each time she slump over with her eye close they shook her awak and made her say “ uncl ” again . each time she said “ uncl , ” they were disappoint . she wonder what “ uncl ” meant . she sat on the sofa in a passiv , phlegmat stupor , her mouth open and all her cloth crumpl in a corner on the floor , and wonder how much longer they would sit around nake with her and make her say uncl in the eleg hotel suit to which orr ’ s old girl friend , giggl uncontrol at yossarian ’ s and dunbar ’ s drunken antic , guid nate and the other member of the motley rescu parti . dunbar squeez orr ’ s old girl friend ’ s fanni grate and pass her back to yossarian , who prop her against the door jamb with both hand on her hip and worm himself against her lascivi until nate seiz him by the arm and pull him away from her into the blue sit room , where dunbar wa alreadi hurl everyth in sight out the window into the court . dobb wa smash furnitur with an ash stand . a nude , ridicul man with a blush appendectomi scar appear in the doorway suddenli and bellow . “ what ’ s go on here ? ” “ your toe are dirti , ” dunbar said . the man cover hi groin with both hand and shrank from view . dunbar , dobb and hungri joe just kept dump everyth they could lift out the window with great , howl whoop of happi abandon . they soon finish with the cloth on the couch and the luggag on the floor , and they were ransack a cedar closet when the door to the inner room open again and a man who wa veri distinguished-look from the neck up pad into view imperi on bare feet . “ here , you , stop that , ” he bark . “ just what do you men think you ’ re do ? ” “ your toe are dirti , ” dunbar said to him . the man cover hi groin as the first one had done and disappear . nate charg after him , but wa block by the first offic , who plod back in hold a pillow in front of him , like a bubbl dancer . “ hey , you men ! ” he roar angrili . “ stop it ! ” “ stop it , ” dunbar repli . “ that ’ s what i said. ” “ that ’ s what i said , ” dunbar said . the offic stamp hi foot petulantli , turn weak with frustrat . “ are you deliber repeat everyth i say ? ” “ are you deliber repeat everyth i say ? ” “ i ’ ll thrash you. ” the man rais a fist . “ i ’ ll thrash you , ” dunbar warn him coldli . “ you ’ re a german spi , and i ’ m go to have you shot. ” “ german spi ? i ’ m an american colonel. ” “ you don ’ t look like an american colonel . you look like a fat man with a pillow in front of him . where ’ s your uniform , if you ’ re an american colonel ? ” “ you just threw it out the window. ” “ all right , men , ” dunbar said . “ lock the silli bastard up . take the silli bastard down to the station hous and throw away the key. ” the colonel blanch with alarm . “ are you all crazi ? where ’ s your badg ? hey , you ! come back in here ! ” but he whirl too late to stop nate , who had glimps hi girl sit on the sofa in the other room and had dart through the doorway behind hi back . the other pour through after him right into the midst of the other nake big shot . hungri joe laugh hyster when he saw them , point in disbelief at one after the other and clasp hi head and side . two with fleshi physiqu advanc trucul until they spi the look of mean dislik and hostil on dobb and dunbar and notic that dobb wa still swing like a two-hand club the wrought-iron ash stand he had use to smash thing in the sit room . nate wa alreadi at hi girl ’ s side . she stare at him without recognit for a few second . then she smile faintli and let her head sink to hi shoulder with her eye close . nate wa in ecstasi ; she had never smile at him befor . “ filpo , ” said a calm , slender , jaded-look man who had not even stir from hi armchair . “ you don ’ t obey order . i told you to get them out , and you ’ ve gone and brought them in . can ’ t you see the differ ? ” “ they ’ ve thrown our thing out the window , general. ” “ good for them . our uniform too ? that wa clever . we ’ ll never be abl to convinc anyon we ’ re superior without our uniforms. ” “ let ’ s get their name , lou , and- “ “ oh , ned , relax , ” said the slender man with practic weari . “ you may be pretti good at move armor divis into action , but you ’ re almost useless in a social situat . sooner or later we ’ ll get our uniform back , and then we ’ ll be their superior again . did they realli throw our uniform out ? that wa a splendid tactic. ” “ they threw everyth out. ” “ the one in the closet , too ? ” “ they threw the closet out , gener . that wa that crash we heard when we thought they were come in to kill us. ” “ and i ’ ll throw you out next , ” dunbar threaten . the gener pale slightli . “ what the devil is he so mad about ? ” he ask yossarian . “ he mean it , too , ” yossarian said . “ you ’ d better let the girl leave. ” “ lord , take her , ” exclaim the gener with relief . “ all she ’ s done is make us feel insecur . at least she might have dislik or resent us for the hundr dollar we paid her . but she wouldn ’ t even do that . your handsom young friend there seem quit attach to her . notic the way he let hi finger linger on the insid of her thigh as he pretend to roll up her stockings. ” nate , caught in the act , blush guiltili and move more quickli through the step of dress her . she wa sound asleep and breath so regularli that she seem to be snore softli . “ let ’ s charg her now , lou ! ” urg anoth offic . “ we ’ ve got more personnel , and we can encircle- “ “ oh , no , bill , ” answer the gener with a sigh . “ you may be a wizard at direct a pincer movement in good weather on level terrain against an enemi that ha alreadi commit hi reserv , but you don ’ t alway think so clearli anywher els . whi should we want to keep her ? ” “ gener , we ’ re in a veri bad strateg posit . we haven ’ t got a stitch of cloth , and it ’ s go to be veri degrad and embarrass for the person who ha to go downstair through the lobbi to get some. ” “ ye , filpo , you ’ re quit right , ” said the gener . “ and that ’ s exactli whi you ’ re the one to do it . get going. ” “ nake , sir ? ” “ take your pillow with you if you want to . and get some cigarett , too , while you ’ re downstair pick up my underwear and pant , will you ? ” “ i ’ ll send everyth up for you , ” yossarian offer . “ there , gener , ” said filpo with relief . “ now i won ’ t have to go. ” “ filpo , you nitwit . can ’ t you see he ’ s lie ? ” “ are you lie ? ” yossarian nod , and filpo ’ s faith wa shatter . yossarian laugh and help nate walk hi girl out into the corridor and into the elev . her face wa smile as though with a love dream as she slept with her head still rest on nate ’ s shoulder . dobb and dunbar ran out into the street to stop a cab . nate ’ s whore look up when they left the car . she swallow dryli sever time dure the arduou trek up the stair to her apart , but she wa sleep soundli again by the time nate undress her and put her to bed . she slept for eighteen hour , while nate dash about the apart all the next morn shush everybodi in sight , and when she woke up she wa deepli in love with him . in the last analysi , that wa all it took to win her heart-a good night ’ s sleep . the girl smile with content when she open her eye and saw him , and then , stretch her long leg languor beneath the rustl sheet , beckon him into bed besid her with that look of simper idioci of a woman in heat . nate move to her in a happi daze , so overcom with raptur that he hardli mind when her kid sister interrupt him again by fli into the room and fling herself down onto the bed between them . nate ’ s whore slap and curs her , but thi time with laughter and gener affect , and nate settl back smugli with an arm about each , feel strong and protect . they made a wonder famili group , he decid . the littl girl would go to colleg when she wa old enough , to smith or radcliff or bryn mawr-h would see to that . nate bound out of bed after a few minut to announc hi good fortun to hi friend at the top of hi voic . he call to them jubilantli to come to the room and slam the door in their startl face as soon as they arriv . he had rememb just in time that hi girl had no cloth on . “ get dress , ” he order her , congratul himself on hi alert . “ perchè ? ” she ask curious . “ perchè ? ” he repeat with an indulg chuckl . “ becaus i don ’ t want them to see you without ani cloth on. ” “ perchè no ? ” she inquir . “ perchè no ? ” he look at her with astonish . “ becaus it isn ’ t right for other men to see you nake , that ’ s why. ” “ perchè no ? ” “ becaus i say no ! ” nate explod in frustrat . “ now don ’ t argu with me . i ’ m the man and you have to do whatev i say . from now on , i forbid you ever to go out of thi room unless you have all your cloth on . is that clear ? ” nate ’ s whore look at him as though he were insan . “ are you crazi ? che succed ? ” “ i mean everi word i say. ” “ tu sei pazzo ! ” she shout at him with incredul indign , and sprang out of bed . snarl unintellig , she snap on panti and strode toward the door . nate drew himself up with full manli author . “ i forbid you to leav thi room that way , ” he inform her . “ tu sei pazzo ! ” she shot back at him , after he had left , shake her head in disbelief . “ idiota ! tu sei un pazzo imbecil ! ” “ tu sei pazzo , ” said her thin kid sister , start out after her in the same haughti walk . “ you come back here , ” nate order her . “ i forbid you to go out that way , too ! ” “ idiota ! ” the kid sister call back at him with digniti after she had flounc past . “ tu sei un pazzo imbecille. ” nate fume in circl of distract helpless for sever second and then sprint out into the sit room to forbid hi friend to look at hi girl friend while she complain about him in onli her panti . “ whi not ? ” ask dunbar . “ whi not ? ” exclaim nate . “ becaus she ’ s my girl now , and it isn ’ t right for you to see her unless she ’ s fulli dressed. ” “ whi not ? ” ask dunbar . “ you see ? ” said hi girl with a shrug . “ lui è pazzo ! ” “ si , è molto pazzo , ” echo her kid sister . “ then make her keep her cloth on if you don ’ t want us to see her , ” argu hungri joe . “ what the hell do you want from us ? ” “ she won ’ t listen to me , ” nate confess sheepishli . “ so from now on you ’ ll all have to shut your eye or look in the other direct when she come in that way . okay ? ” “ madonn ’ ! ” cri hi girl in exasper , and stamp out of the room . “ madonn ’ ! ” cri her kid sister , and stamp out behind her . “ lui è pazzo , ” yossarian observ good-naturedli . “ i certainli have to admit it. ” “ hey , you crazi or someth ? ” hungri joe demand of nate . “ the next thing you know you ’ ll be tri to make her give up hustling. ” “ from now on , ” nate said to hi girl , “ i forbid you to go out hustling. ” “ perchè ? ” she inquir curious . “ perchè ? ” he scream with amaz . “ becaus it ’ s not nice , that ’ s whi ! ” “ perchè no ? ” “ becaus it just isn ’ t ! ” nate insist . “ it just isn ’ t right for a nice girl like you to go look for other men to sleep with . i ’ ll give you all the money you need , so you won ’ t have to do it ani more. ” “ and what will i do all day instead ? ” “ do ? ” said nate . “ you ’ ll do what all your friend do. ” “ my friend go look for men to sleep with. ” “ then get new friend ! i don ’ t even want you to associ with girl like that , anyway . prostitut is bad ! everybodi know that , even him. ” he turn with confid to the experienc old man . “ am i right ? ” “ you ’ re wrong , ” answer the old man . “ prostitut give her an opportun to meet peopl . it provid fresh air and wholesom exercis , and it keep her out of trouble. ” “ from now on , ” nate declar sternli to hi girl friend , “ i forbid you to have anyth to do with that wick old man. ” “ va fongul ! ” hi girl repli , roll her harass eye up toward the ceil . “ what doe he want from me ? ” she implor , shake her fist . “ lasciami ! ” she told him in menac entreati . “ stupido ! if you think my friend are so bad , go tell your friend not to ficky-fick all the time with my friend ! ” “ from now on , ” nate told hi friend , “ i think you fellow ought to stop run around with her friend and settl down. ” “ madonn ’ ! ” cri hi friend , roll their harass eye up toward the ceil . nate had gone clear out of hi mind . he want them all to fall in love right away and get marri . dunbar could marri orr ’ s whore , and yossarian could fall in love with nurs duckett or anyon els he like . after the war they could all work for nate ’ s father and bring up their children in the same suburb . nate saw it all veri clearli . love had transmogrifi him into a romant idiot , and they drove him away back into the bedroom to wrangl with hi girl over captain black . she agre not to go to bed with captain black again or give him ani more of nate ’ s money , but she would not budg an inch on her friendship with the ugli , ill-kempt , dissip , filthy-mind old man , who wit nate ’ s flower love affair with insult deris and would not admit that congress wa the greatest delib bodi in the whole world . “ from now on , ” nate order hi girl firmli , “ i absolut forbid you even to speak to that disgust old man. ” “ again the old man ? ” cri the girl in wail confus . “ perchè no ? ” “ he doesn ’ t like the hous of representatives. ” “ mamma mia ! what ’ s the matter with you ? ” “ è pazzo , ” observ her kid sister philosoph . “ that ’ s what ’ s the matter with him. ” “ si , ” the older girl agre readili , tear at her long brown hair with both hand . “ lui è pazzo. ” but she miss nate when he wa away and wa furiou with yossarian when he punch nate in the face with all hi might and knock him into the hospit with a broken nose . 34 thanksgiv it wa actual all sergeant knight ’ s fault that yossarian bust nate in the nose on thanksgiv day , after everyon in the squadron had given humbl thank to milo for provid the fantast opul meal on which the offic and enlist men had gorg themselv insati all afternoon and for dispens like inexhaust largess the unopen bottl of cheap whiskey he hand out unsparingli to everi man who ask . even befor dark , young soldier with pasti white face were throw up everywher and pass out drunkenli on the ground . the air turn foul . other men pick up steam as the hour pass , and the aimless , riotou celebr continu . it wa a raw , violent , guzzl saturnalia that spill obstreper through the wood to the offic ’ club and spread up into the hill toward the hospit and the antiaircraft-gun emplac . there were fist fight in the squadron and one stab . corpor kolodni shot himself through the leg in the intellig tent while play with a load gun and had hi gum and toe paint purpl in the speed ambul as he lay on hi back with the blood spurt from hi wound . men with cut finger , bleed head , stomach cramp and broken ankl came limp penit up to the medic tent to have their gum and toe paint purpl by gu and we and be given a lax to throw into the bush . the joyou celebr last long into the night , and the still wa fractur often by wild , exult shout and by the cri of peopl who were merri or sick . there wa the recur sound of retch and moan , of laughter , greet , threat and swear , and of bottl shatter against rock . there were dirti song in the distanc . it wa wors than new year ’ s eve . yossarian went to bed earli for safeti and soon dream that he wa flee almost headlong down an endless wooden staircas , make a loud , staccato clatter with hi heel . then he woke up a littl and realiz someon wa shoot at him with a machin gun . a tortur , terrifi sob rose in hi throat . hi first thought wa that milo wa attack the squadron again , and he roll of hi cot to the floor and lay underneath in a trembl , pray ball , hi heart thump like a drop forg , hi bodi bath in a cold sweat . there wa no nois of plane . a drunken , happi laugh sound from afar . “ happi new year , happi new year ! ” a triumphant familiar voic shout hilari from high abov between the short , sharp burst of machin gun fire , and yossarian understood that some men had gone as a prank to one of the sandbag machine-gun emplac milo had instal in the hill after hi raid on the squadron and staf with hi own men . yossarian blaze with hatr and wrath when he saw he wa the victim of an irrespons joke that had destroy hi sleep and reduc him to a whimper hulk . he want to kill , he want to murder . he wa angrier than he had ever been befor , angrier even than when he had slid hi hand around mcwatt ’ s neck to strangl him . the gun open fire again . voic cri “ happi new year ! ” and gloat laughter roll down from the hill through the dark like a witch ’ s glee . in moccasin and coveral , yossarian charg out of hi tent for reveng with his.45 , ram a clip of cartridg up into the grip and slam the bolt of the gun back to load it . he snap off the safeti catch and wa readi to shoot . he heard nate run after him to restrain him , call hi name . the machin gun open fire onc more from a black rise abov the motor pool , and orang tracer bullet skim like low-glid dash over the top of the shadowi tent , almost clip the peak . roar of rough laughter rang out again between the short burst . yossarian felt resent boil like acid insid him ; they were endang hi life , the bastard ! with blind , feroci rage and determin , he race across the squadron past the motor pool , run as fast as he could , and wa alreadi pound up into the hill along the narrow , wind path when nate final caught up , still call “ yo-yo ! yo-yo ! ” with plead concern and implor him to stop . he grasp yossarian ’ s shoulder and tri to hold him back . yossarian twist free , turn . nate reach for him again , and yossarian drove hi fist squar into nate ’ s delic young face as hard as he could , curs him , then drew hi arm back to hit him again , but nate had drop out of sight with a groan and lay curl up on the ground with hi head buri in both hand and blood stream between hi finger . yossarian whirl and plung ahead up the path without look back . soon he saw the machin gun . two figur leap up in silhouett when they heard him and fled into the night with taunt laughter befor he could get there . he wa too late . their footstep reced , leav the circl of sandbag empti and silent in the crisp and windless moonlight . he look about dejectedli . jeer laughter came to him again , from a distanc . a twig snap nearbi . yossarian drop to hi knee with a cold thrill of elat and aim . he heard a stealthi rustl of leav on the other side of the sandbag and fire two quick round . someon fire back at him onc , and he recogn the shot . “ dunbar ? he call . “ yossarian ? ” the two men left their hide place and walk forward to meet in the clear with weari disappoint , their gun down . they were both shiver slightli from the frosti air and wheez from the labor of their uphil rush . “ the bastard , ” said yossarian . “ they got away. ” “ they took ten year off my life , ” dunbar exclaim . “ i thought that son of a bitch milo wa bomb us again . i ’ ve never been so scare . i wish i knew who the bastard were . “ one wa sergeant knight. ” “ let ’ s go kill him. ” dunbar ’ s teeth were chatter . “ he had no right to scare us that way. ” yossarian no longer want to kill anyon . “ let ’ s help nate first . i think i hurt him at the bottom of the hill. ” but there wa no sign of nate along the path , even though yossarian locat the right spot by the blood on the stone . nate wa not in hi tent either , and they did not catch up with him until the next morn when they check into the hospit as patient after learn he had check in with a broken nose the night befor . nate beam in frighten surpris as they pad into the ward in their slipper and robe behind nurs cramer and were assign to their bed . nate ’ s nose wa in a bulki cast , and he had two black eye . he kept blush giddili in shi embarrass and say he wa sorri when yossarian came over to apolog for hit him . yossarian felt terribl ; he could hardli bear to look at nate ’ s batter counten , even though the sight wa so comic he wa tempt to guffaw . dunbar wa disgust by their sentiment , and all three were reliev when hungri joe came barg in unexpectedli with hi intric black camera and trumped-up symptom of append to be near enough to yossarian to take pictur of him feel up nurs duckett . like yossarian , he wa soon disappoint . nurs duckett had decid to marri a doctor-ani doctor , becaus they all did so well in business-and would not take chanc in the vicin of the man who might someday be her husband . hungri joe wa irat and inconsol until-of all people-th chaplain wa led in wear a maroon corduroy bathrob , shine like a skinni lighthous with a radiant grin of self-satisfact too tremend to be conceal . the chaplain had enter the hospit with a pain in hi heart that the doctor thought wa ga in hi stomach and with an advanc case of wisconsin shingl . “ what in the world are wisconsin shingl ? ” ask yossarian . “ that ’ s just what the doctor want to know ! ” blurt out the chaplain proudli , and burst into laughter . no one had ever seen him so waggish , or so happi . “ there ’ s no such thing as wisconsin shingl . don ’ t you understand ? i lie . i made a deal with the doctor . i promis that i would let them know when my wisconsin shingl went away if they would promis not to do anyth to cure them . i never told a lie befor . isn ’ t it wonder ? ” the chaplain had sin , and it wa good . common sens told him that tell lie and defect from duti were sin . on the other hand , everyon knew that sin wa evil , and that no good could come from evil . but he did feel good ; he felt posit marvel . consequ , it follow logic that tell lie and defect from duti could not be sin . the chaplain had master , in a moment of divin intuit , the handi techniqu of protect ration , and he wa exhilar by hi discoveri . it wa miracul . it wa almost no trick at all , he saw , to turn vice into virtu and slander into truth , impot into abstin , arrog into humil , plunder into philanthropi , thieveri into honor , blasphemi into wisdom , brutal into patriot , and sadism into justic . anybodi could do it ; it requir no brain at all . it mere requir no charact . with effervesc agil the chaplain ran through the whole gamut of orthodox immor , while nate sat up in bed with flush elat , astound by the mad gang of companion of which he found himself the nucleu . he wa flatter and apprehens , certain that some sever offici would soon appear and throw the whole lot of them out like a pack of bum . no one bother them . in the even they all troop exuberantli out to see a lousi hollywood extravaganza in technicolor , and when they troop exuberantli back in after the lousi hollywood extravaganza , the soldier in white wa there , and dunbar scream and went to piec . “ he ’ s back ! ” dunbar scream . “ he ’ s back ! he ’ s back ! ” yossarian froze in hi track , paralyz as much by the eeri shrill in dunbar ’ s voic as by the familiar , white , morbid sight of the soldier in white cover from head to toe in plaster and gauz . a strang , quaver , involuntari nois came bubbl from yossarian ’ s throat . “ he ’ s back ! ” dunbar scream again . “ he ’ s back ! ” a patient deliri with fever echo in automat terror . all at onc the ward erupt into bedlam . mob of sick and injur men began rant incoher and run and jump in the aisl as though the build were on fire . a patient with one foot and one crutch wa hop back and forth swiftli in panic cri , “ what is it ? what is it ? are we burn ? are we burn ? ” “ he ’ s back ! ” someon shout at him . “ didn ’ t you hear him ? he ’ s back ! he ’ s back ! ” “ who ’ s back ? ” shout someon els . “ who is it ? ” “ what doe it mean ? what should we do ? ” “ are we on fire ? ” “ get up and run , damn it ! everybodi get up and run ! ” everybodi got out of bed and began run from one end of the ward to the other . one c.i.d . man wa look for a gun to shoot one of the other c.i.d . men who had jab hi elbow into hi eye . the ward had turn into chao . the patient deliri with the high fever leap into the aisl and almost knock over the patient with one foot , who accident brought the black rubber tip of hi crutch down on the other ’ s bare foot , crush some toe . the deliri man with the fever and the crush toe sank to the floor and wept in pain while other men trip over him and hurt him more in their blind , mill , agon stamped . “ he ’ s back ! ” all the men kept mumbl and chant and call out hyster as they rush back and forth . “ he ’ s back , he ’ s back ! ” nurs cramer wa there in the middl suddenli like a spin policeman , tri desper to restor order , dissolv helplessli into tear when she fail . “ be still , pleas be still , ” she urg uselessli through her massiv sob . the chaplain , pale as a ghost , had no idea what wa go on . neither did nate , who kept close to yossarian ’ s side , cling to hi elbow , or hungri joe , who follow dubious with hi scrawni fist clench and glanc from side to side with a face that wa scare . “ hey , what ’ s go on ? ” hungri joe plead . “ what the hell is go on ? ” “ it ’ s the same one ! ” dunbar shout at him emphat in a voic rise clearli abov the raucou commot . “ don ’ t you understand ? it ’ s the same one. ” “ the same one ! ” yossarian heard himself echo , quiver with a deep and omin excit that he could not control , and shove hi way after dunbar toward the bed of the soldier in white . “ take it easi , fella , ” the short patriot texan counsel affabl , with an uncertain grin . “ there ’ s no caus to be upset . whi don ’ t we all just take it easi ? ” “ the same one ! ” other began murmur , chant and shout . suddenli nurs duckett wa there , too . “ what ’ s go on ? ” she demand . “ he ’ s back ! ” nurs cramer scream , sink into her arm . “ he ’ s back , he ’ s back ! ” it wa , inde , the same man . he had lost a few inch and ad some weight , but yossarian rememb him instantli by the two stiff anu and the two stiff , thick , useless leg all drawn upward into the air almost perpendicularli by the taut rope and the long lead weight suspend from pulley over him and by the fray black hole in the bandag over hi mouth . he had , in fact , hardli chang at all . there wa the same zinc pipe rise from the hard stone mass over hi groin and lead to the clear glass jar on the floor . there wa the same clear glass jar on a pole drip fluid into him through the crook of hi elbow . yossarian would recogn him anywher . he wonder who he wa . “ there ’ s no one insid ! ” dunbar yell out at him unexpectedli . yossarian felt hi heart skip a beat and hi leg grow weak . “ what are you talk about ? ” he shout with dread , stun by the haggard , spark anguish in dunbar ’ s eye and by hi craze look of wild shock and horror . “ are you nut or someth ? what the hell do you mean , there ’ s no one insid ? ” “ they ’ ve stolen him away ! ” dunbar shout back . “ he ’ s hollow insid , like a chocol soldier . they just took him away and left those bandag there. ” “ whi should they do that ? ” “ whi do they do anyth ? ” “ they ’ ve stolen him away ! ” scream someon els , and peopl all over the ward began scream , “ they ’ ve stolen him away . they ’ ve stolen him away ! ” “ go back to your bed , ” nurs duckett plead with dunbar and yossarian , push feebli against yossarian ’ s chest . “ pleas go back to your beds. ” “ you ’ re crazi ! ” yossarian shout angrili at dunbar . “ what the hell make you say that ? ” “ did anyon see him ? ” dunbar demand with sneer fervor . “ you saw him , didn ’ t you ? ” yossarian said to nurs duckett . “ tell dunbar there ’ s someon inside. ” “ lieuten schmulker is insid , ” nurs duckett said . “ he ’ s burn all over. ” “ did she see him ? ” “ you saw him , didn ’ t you ? ” “ the doctor who bandag him saw him. ” “ go get him , will you ? which doctor wa it ? ” nurs duckett react to the question with a startl gasp . “ the doctor isn ’ t even here ! ” she exclaim . “ the patient wa brought to us that way from a field hospital. ” “ you see ? ” cri nurs cramer . “ there ’ s no one insid ! ” “ there ’ s no one insid ! ” yell hungri joe , and began stamp on the floor . dunbar broke through and leap up furious on the soldier in white ’ s bed to see for himself , press hi gleam eye down hungrili against the tatter black hole in the shell of white bandag . he wa still bent over stare with one eye into the lightless , unstir void of the soldier in white ’ s mouth when the doctor and the m.p. came run to help yossarian pull him away . the doctor wore gun at the waist . the guard carri carbin and rifl with which they shove and jolt the crowd of mutter patient back . a stretcher on wheel wa there , and the solder in white wa lift out of bed skill and roll out of sight in a matter of second . the doctor and m.p. move through the ward assur everyon that everyth wa all right . nurs duckett pluck yossarian ’ s arm and whisper to him furtiv to meet her in the broom closet outsid in the corridor . yossarian rejoic when he heard her . he thought nurs duckett final want to get laid and pull her skirt up the second they were alon in the broom closet , but she push him away . she had urgent news about dunbar . “ they ’ re go to disappear him , ” she said . yossarian squint at her uncomprehendingli . “ they ’ re what ? ” he ask in surpris , and laugh uneasili . “ what doe that mean ? ” “ i don ’ t know . i heard them talk behind a door. ” “ who ? ” “ i don ’ t know . i couldn ’ t see them . i just heard them say they were go to disappear dunbar. ” “ whi are they go to disappear him ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ it doesn ’ t make sens . it isn ’ t even good grammar . what the hell doe it mean when they disappear somebodi ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ jesu , you ’ re a great help ! ” “ whi are you pick on me ? ” nurs duckett protest with hurt feel , and began snif back tear . “ i ’ m onli tri to help . it isn ’ t my fault they ’ re go to disappear him , is it ? i shouldn ’ t even be tell you. ” yossarian took her in hi arm and hug her with gentl , contrit affect . “ i ’ m sorri , ” he apolog , kiss her cheek respect , and hurri away to warn dunbar , who wa nowher to be found . 35 milo the milit for the first time in hi life , yossarian pray . he got down on hi knee and pray to nate not to volunt to fli more than seventi mission after chief white halfoat did die of pneumonia in the hospit and nate had appli for hi job . but nate just wouldn ’ t listen . “ i ’ ve got to fli more mission , ” nate insist lame with a crook smile . “ otherwis they ’ ll send me home. ” “ so ? ” “ i don ’ t want to go home until i can take her back with me. ” “ she mean that much to you ? ” nate nod dejectedli . “ i might never see her again. ” “ then get yourself ground , ” yossarian urg . “ you ’ ve finish your mission and you don ’ t need the flight pay . whi don ’ t you ask for chief white halfoat ’ s job , if you can stand work for captain black ? ” nate shook hi head , hi cheek darken with shi and regret mortif . “ they won ’ t give it to me . i spoke to colonel korn , and he told me i ’ d have to fli more mission or be sent home. ” yossarian curs savag . “ that ’ s just plain meanness. ” “ i don ’ t mind , i guess . i ’ ve flown seventi mission without get hurt . i guess i can fli a few more. ” “ don ’ t do anyth at all about it until i talk to someon , ” yossarian decid , and went look for help from milo , who went immedi afterward to colonel cathcart for help in have himself assign to more combat mission . milo had been earn mani distinct for himself . he had flown fearlessli into danger and critic by sell petroleum and ball bear to germani at good price in order to make a good profit and help maintain a balanc of power between the contend forc . hi nerv under fire wa grace and infinit . with a devot to purpos abov and beyond the line of duti , he had then rais the price of food in hi mess hall so high that all offic and enlist men had to turn over all their pay to him in order to eat . their alternative-ther wa an altern , of cours , sinc milo detest coercion and wa a vocal champion of freedom of choice-wa to starv . when he encount a wave of enemi resist to thi attack , he stuck to hi posit without regard for hi safeti or reput and gallantli invok the law of suppli and demand . and when someon somewher said no , milo gave ground grudgingli , valiantli defend , even in retreat , the histor right of free men to pay as much as they had to for the thing they need in order to surviv . milo had been caught red-hand in the act of plunder hi countrymen , and , as a result , hi stock had never been higher . he prove good as hi word when a rawbon major from minnesota curl hi lip in rebelli disavow and demand hi share of the syndic milo kept say everybodi own . milo met the challeng by write the word “ a share ” on the nearest scrap of paper and hand it away with a virtuou disdain that won the envi and admir of almost everyon who knew him . hi glori wa at a peak , and colonel cathcart , who knew and admir hi war record , wa astonish by the deferenti humil with which milo present himself at group headquart and made hi fantast appeal for more hazard assign . “ you want to fli more combat mission ? ” colonel cathcart gasp . “ what in the world for ? ” milo answer in a demur voic with hi face lower meekli . “ i want to do my duti , sir . the countri is at war , and i want to fight to defend it like the rest of the fellows. ” “ but , milo , you are do your duti , ” colonel cathcart exclaim with a laugh that thunder jovial . “ i can ’ t think of a singl person who ’ s done more for the men than you have . who gave them chocolate-cov cotton ? ” milo shook hi head slowli and sadli . “ but be a good mess offic in wartim just isn ’ t enough , colonel cathcart. ” “ certainli it is , milo . i don ’ t know what ’ s come over you. ” “ certainli it isn ’ t , colonel , ” milo disagre in a somewhat firm tone , rais hi subservi eye significantli just far enough to arrest colonel cathcart ’ s . “ some of the men are begin to talk. ” “ oh , is that it ? give me their name , milo . give me their name and i ’ ll see to it that they go on everi danger mission the group flies. ” “ no , colonel , i ’ m afraid they ’ re right , ” milo said , with hi head droop again . “ i wa sent oversea as a pilot , and i should be fli more combat mission and spend less time on my duti as a mess officer. ” colonel cathcart wa surpris but co-op . “ well , milo , if you realli feel that way , i ’ m sure we can make whatev arrang you want . how long have you been oversea now ? ” “ eleven month , sir. ” “ and how mani mission have you flown ? ” “ five. ” “ five ? ” ask colonel cathcart . “ five , sir. ” “ five , eh ? ” colonel cathcart rub hi cheek pensiv . “ that isn ’ t veri good , is it ? ” “ isn ’ t it ? ” ask milo in a sharpli edg voic , glanc up again . colonel cathcart quail . “ on the contrari , that ’ s veri good , milo , ” he correct himself hastili . “ it isn ’ t bad at all. ” “ no , colonel , ” milo said , with a long , languish , wist sigh , “ it isn ’ t veri good . although it ’ s veri gener of you to say so. ” “ but it ’ s realli not bad , milo . not bad at all , when you consid all your other valuabl contribut . five mission , you say ? just five ? ” “ just five , sir. ” “ just five. ” colonel cathcart grew aw depress for a moment as he wonder what milo wa realli think , and whether he had alreadi got a black eye with him . “ five is veri good , milo , ” he observ with enthusiasm , spi a ray of hope . “ that averag out to almost one combat mission everi two month . and i ’ ll bet your total doesn ’ t includ the time you bomb us. ” “ ye , sir . it does. ” “ it doe ? ” inquir colonel cathcart with mild wonder . “ you didn ’ t actual fli along on that mission , did you ? if i rememb correctli , you were in the control tower with me , weren ’ t you ? ” “ but it wa my mission , ” milo contend . “ i organ it , and we use my plane and suppli . i plan and supervis the whole thing. ” “ oh , certainli , milo , certainli . i ’ m not disput you . i ’ m onli check the figur to make sure you ’ re claim all you ’ re entitl to . did you also includ the time we contract with you to bomb the bridg at orvieto ? ” “ oh , no , sir . i didn ’ t think i should , sinc i wa in orvieto at the time direct the antiaircraft fire. ” “ i don ’ t see what differ that make , milo . it wa still your mission . and a damn good one , too , i must say . we didn ’ t get the bridg , but we did have a beauti bomb pattern . i rememb gener peckem comment on it . no , milo , i insist you count orvieto as a mission , too. ” “ if you insist , sir. ” “ i do insist , milo . now , let ’ s see-you now have a grand total of six mission , which is damn good , milo , damn good , realli . six mission is an increas of twenti per cent in just a coupl of minut , which is not bad at all , milo , not bad at all. ” “ mani of the other men have seventi mission , ” milo point out . “ but they never produc ani chocolate-cov cotton , did they ? milo , you ’ re do more than your share. ” “ but they ’ re get all the fame and opportun , ” milo persist with a petul that border on snivel . “ sir , i want to get in there and fight like the rest of the fellow . that ’ s what i ’ m here for . i want to win medal , too. ” “ ye , milo , of cours . we all want to spend more time in combat . but peopl like you and me serv in differ way . look at my own record , ” colonel cathcart utter a deprecatori laugh . “ i ’ ll bet it ’ s not gener known , milo , that i myself have flown onli four mission , is it ? ” “ no , sir , ” milo repli . “ it ’ s gener known that you ’ ve flown onli two mission . and that one of those occur when aarfi accident flew you over enemi territori while navig you to napl for a black-market water cooler. ” colonel cathcart , flush with embarrass , abandon all further argument . “ all right , milo . i can ’ t prais you enough for what you want to do . if it realli mean so much to you , i ’ ll have major major assign you to the next sixty-four mission so that you can have seventi , too. ” “ thank you , colonel , thank you , sir . you don ’ t know what thi means. ” “ don ’ t mention it , milo . i know exactli what it means. ” “ no , colonel , i don ’ t think you do know what it mean , ” milo disagre pointedli . “ someon will have to begin run the syndic for me right away . it ’ s veri complic , and i might get shot down at ani time. ” colonel cathcart brighten instantli at the thought and began rub hi hand with avarici zest . “ you know , milo , i think colonel korn and i might be will to take the syndic off your hand , ” he suggest in an offhand manner , almost lick hi lip in savori anticip . “ our experi in black-market plum tomato should come in veri use . where do we begin ? ” milo watch colonel cathcart steadili with a bland and guileless express . “ thank you , sir , that ’ s veri good of you . begin with a salt-fre diet for gener peckem and a fat-fre diet for gener dreedle. ” “ let me get a pencil . what ’ s next ? ” “ the cedars. ” “ cedar ? ” “ from lebanon. ” “ lebanon ? ” “ we ’ ve got cedar from lebanon due at the sawmil in oslo to be turn into shingl for the builder in cape cod . c.o.d . and then there ’ s the peas. ” “ pea ? ” “ that are on the high sea . we ’ ve got boatload of pea that are on the high sea from atlanta to holland to pay for the tulip that were ship to geneva to pay for the chees that must go to vienna m.i.f. ” “ m.i.f . ? ” “ money in front . the hapsburg are shaky. ” “ milo. ” “ and don ’ t forget the galvan zinc in the warehous at flint . four carload of galvan zinc from flint must be flown to the smelter in damascu by noon of the eighteenth , term f.o.b . calcutta two per cent ten day e.o.m . one messerschmitt full of hemp is due in belgrad for a c-47 and a half full of those semi-pit date we stuck them with from khartoum . use the money from the portugues anchovi we ’ re sell back to lisbon to pay for the egyptian cotton we ’ ve got come back to us from mamaroneck and to pick up as mani orang as you can in spain . alway pay cash for naranjas. ” “ naranja ? ” “ that ’ s what they call orang in spain , and these are spanish orang . and-oh , ye . don ’ t forget piltdown man. ” “ piltdown man ? ” “ ye , piltdown man . the smithsonian institut is not in a posit at thi time to meet our price for a second piltdown man , but they are look forward to the death of a wealthi and belov donor and- “ “ milo. ” “ franc want all the parsley we can send them , and i think we might as well , becaus we ’ ll need the franc for the lire for the pfennig for the date when they get back . i ’ ve also order a tremend shipment of peruvian balsa wood for distribut to each of the mess hall in the syndic on a pro rata basis. ” “ balsa wood ? what are the mess hall go to do with balsa wood ? ” “ good balsa wood isn ’ t so easi to come by these day , colonel . i just didn ’ t think it wa a good idea to pass up the chanc to buy it. ” “ no , i suppos not , ” colonel cathcart surmis vagu with the look of somebodi seasick . “ and i assum the price wa right. ” “ the price , ” said milo , “ wa outrageous-posit exorbit ! but sinc we bought it from one of our own subsidiari , we were happi to pay it . look after the hides. ” “ the hive ? ” “ the hides. ” “ the hide ? ” “ the hide . in bueno air . they have to be tanned. ” “ tan ? ” “ in newfoundland . and ship to helsinki n.m.i.f . befor the spring thaw begin . everyth to finland goe n.m.i.f . befor the spring thaw begins. ” “ no money in front ? ” guess colonel cathcart . “ good , colonel . you have a gift , sir . and then there ’ s the cork. ” “ the cork ? ” “ that must go to new york , the shoe for toulous , the ham for siam , the nail from wale , and the tangerin for new orleans. ” “ milo. ” “ we have coal in newcastl , sir. ” colonel cathcart threw up hi hand . “ milo , stop ! ” he cri , almost in tear . “ it ’ s no use . you ’ re just like i am-indispens ! ” he push hi pencil asid and rose to hi feet in frantic exasper . “ milo , you can ’ t fli sixty-four more mission . you can ’ t even fli one more mission . the whole system would fall apart if anyth happen to you. ” milo nod seren with complac gratif . “ sir , are you forbid me to fli ani more combat mission ? ” “ milo , i forbid you to fli ani more combat mission , ” colonel cathcart declar in a tone of stern and inflex author . “ but that ’ s not fair , sir , ” said milo . “ what about my record ? the other men are get all the fame and medal and public . whi should i be penal just becaus i ’ m do such a good job as mess offic ? ” “ no , milo , it isn ’ t fair . but i don ’ t see anyth we can do about it. ” “ mayb we can get someon els to fli my mission for me. ” “ but mayb we can get someon els to fli your mission for you , ” colonel cathcart suggest . “ how about the strike coal miner in pennsylvania and west virginia ? ” milo shook hi head . “ it would take too long to train them . but whi not the men in the squadron , sir ? after all , i ’ m do thi for them . they ought to be will to do someth for me in return. ” “ but whi not the men in the squadron , milo ? ” colonel cathcart exclaim . “ after all , you ’ re do all thi for them . they ought to be will to do someth for you in return. ” “ what ’ s fair is fair. ” “ what ’ s fair is fair. ” “ they could take turn , sir. ” “ they might even take turn fli your mission for you , milo. ” “ who get the credit ? ” “ you get the credit , milo . and if a man win a medal fli one of your mission , you get the medal. ” “ who die if he get kill ? ” “ whi , he die , of cours . after all , milo , what ’ s fair is fair . there ’ s just one thing. ” “ you ’ ll have to rais the number of missions. ” “ i might have to rais the number of mission again , and i ’ m not sure the men will fli them . they ’ re still pretti sore becaus i jump them to seventi . if i can get just one of the regular offic to fli more , the rest will probabl follow. ” “ nate will fli more mission , sir , ” milo said . “ i wa told in strictest confid just a littl while ago that he ’ ll do anyth he ha to in order to remain oversea with a girl he ’ s fallen in love with. ” “ but nate will fli more ! ” colonel cathcart declar , and he brought hi hand togeth in a resound clap of victori . “ ye , nate will fli more . and thi time i ’ m realli go to jump the mission , right up to eighti , and realli knock gener dreedl ’ s eye out . and thi is a good way to get that lousi rat yossarian back into combat where he might get killed. ” “ yossarian ? ” a tremor of deep concern pass over milo ’ s simpl , homespun featur , and he scratch the corner of hi reddish-brown mustach thought . “ yeah , yossarian . i hear he ’ s go around say that he ’ s finish hi mission and the war ’ s over for him . well , mayb he ha finish hi mission . but he hasn ’ t finish your mission , ha he ? ha ! ha ! ha he got a surpris come to him ! ” “ sir , yossarian is a friend of mine , ” milo object . “ i ’ d hate to be respons for do anyth that would put him back in combat . i owe a lot to yossarian . isn ’ t there ani way we could make an except of him ? ” “ oh , no , milo. ” colonel cathcart cluck sententi , shock by the suggest . “ we must never play favorit . we must alway treat everi man alike. ” “ i ’ d give everyth i own to yossarian , ” milo persev game on yossarian ’ s behalf . “ but sinc i don ’ t own anyth , i can ’ t give everyth to him , can i ? so he ’ ll just have to take hi chanc with the rest of the men , won ’ t he ? ” “ what ’ s fair is fair , milo. ” “ ye , sir , what ’ s fair is fair , ” milo agre . “ yossarian is no better than the other men , and he ha no right to expect ani special privileg , ha he ? ” “ no , milo . what ’ s fair is fair. ” and there wa no time for yossarian to save himself from combat onc colonel cathcart issu hi announc rais the mission to eighti late that same afternoon , no time to dissuad nate from fli them or even to conspir again with dobb to murder colonel cathcart , for the alert sound suddenli at dawn the next day and the men were rush into the truck befor a decent breakfast could be prepar , and they were driven at top speed to the brief room and then out to the airfield , where the clitterclatt fuel truck were still pump gasolin into the tank of the plane and the scamper crew of armor were toil as swiftli as they could at hoist the thousand-pound demolit bomb into the bomb bay . everybodi wa run , and engin were turn on and warm up as soon as the fuel truck had finish . intellig had report that a disabl italian cruiser in drydock at la spezia would be tow by the german that same morn to a channel at the entranc of the harbor and scuttl there to depriv the alli armi of deep-wat port facil when they captur the citi . for onc , a militari intellig report prove accur . the long vessel wa halfway across the harbor when they flew in from the west , and broke it apart with direct hit from everi flight that fill them all with wave of enorm satisfi group pride until they found themselv engulf in great barrag of flak that rose from gun in everi bend of the huge horsesho of mountain land below . even havermey resort to the wildest evas action he could command when he saw what a vast distanc he had still to travel to escap , and dobb , at the pilot ’ s control in hi format , zig when he should have zag , skid hi plane into the plane alongsid , and chew off it tail . hi wing broke off at the base , and hi plane drop like a rock and wa almost out of sight in an instant . there wa no fire , no smoke , not the slightest untoward nois . the remain wing revolv as ponder as a grind cement mixer as the plane plummet nose downward in a straight line at acceler speed until it struck the water , which foam open at the impact like a white water lili on the dark-blu sea , and wash back in a geyser of apple-green bubbl when the plane sank . it wa over in a matter of second . there were no parachut . and nate , in the other plane , wa kill too . 36 the cellar nate ’ s death almost kill the chaplain . chaplain shipman wa seat in hi tent , labor over hi paperwork in hi read spectacl , when hi phone rang and news of the mid-air collis wa given to him from the field . hi insid turn at onc to dri clay . hi hand wa trembl as he put the phone down . hi other hand began trembl . the disast wa too immens to contempl . twelv men killed-how ghastli , how veri , veri aw ! hi feel of terror grew . he pray instinct that yossarian , nate , hungri joe and hi other friend would not be list among the victim , then berat himself repentantli , for to pray for their safeti wa to pray for the death of other young men he did not even know . it wa too late to pray ; yet that wa all he knew how to do . hi heart wa pound with a nois that seem to be come from somewher outsid , and he knew he would never sit in a dentist ’ s chair again , never glanc at a surgic tool , never wit an automobil accid or hear a voic shout at night , without experienc the same violent thump in hi chest and dread that he wa go to die . he would never watch anoth fist fight without fear he wa go to faint and crack hi skull open on the pavement or suffer a fatal heart attack or cerebr hemorrhag . he wonder if he would ever see hi wife again or hi three small children . he wonder if he ever should see hi wife again , now that captain black had plant in hi mind such strong doubt about the fidel and charact of all women . there were so mani other men , he felt , who could prove more satisfi to her sexual . when he thought of death now , he alway thought of hi wife , and when he thought of hi wife he alway thought of lose her . in anoth minut the chaplain felt strong enough to rise and walk with glum reluct to the tent next door for sergeant whitcomb . they drove in sergeant whitcomb ’ s jeep . the chaplain made fist of hi hand to keep them from shake as they lay in hi lap . he ground hi teeth togeth and tri not to hear as sergeant whitcomb chirrup exultantli over the tragic event . twelv men kill meant twelv more form letter of condol that could be mail in one bunch to the next of kin over colonel cathcart ’ s signatur , give sergeant whitcomb hope of get an articl on colonel cathcart into the saturday even post in time for easter . at the field a heavi silenc prevail , overpow motion like a ruthless , insens spell hold in thrall the onli be who might break it . the chaplain wa in awe . he had never beheld such a great , appal still befor . almost two hundr tire , gaunt , downcast men stood hold their parachut pack in a somber and unstir crowd outsid the brief room , their face stare blankli in differ angl of stun deject . they seem unwil to go , unabl to move . the chaplain wa acut consciou of the faint nois hi footstep made as he approach . hi eye search hurriedli , frantic , through the immobil maze of limp figur . he spi yossarian final with a feel of immens joy , and then hi mouth gape open slowli in unbear horror as he note yossarian ’ s vivid , beaten , grimi look of deep , drug despair . he understood at onc , recoil in pain from the realiz and shake hi head with a protest and implor grimac , that nate wa dead . the knowledg struck him with a numb shock . a sob broke from him . the blood drain from hi leg , and he thought he wa go to drop . nate wa dead . all hope that he wa mistaken wa wash away by the sound of nate ’ s name emerg with recur clariti now from the almost inaud babbl of murmur voic that he wa suddenli awar of for the first time . nate wa dead : the boy had been kill . a whimper sound rose in the chaplain ’ s throat , and hi jaw began to quiver . hi eye fill with tear , and he wa cri . he start toward yossarian on tipto to mourn besid him and share hi wordless grief . at that moment a hand grab him roughli around the arm and a brusqu voic demand , “ chaplain shipman ? ” he turn with surpris to face a stout , pugnaci colonel with a larg head and mustach and a smooth , florid skin . he had never seen the man befor . “ ye . what is it ? ” the finger grasp the chaplain ’ s arm were hurt him , and he tri in vain to squirm loos . “ come along. ” the chaplain pull back in frighten confus . “ where ? whi ? who are you , anyway ? ” “ you ’ d better come along with us , father , ” a lean , hawk-fac major on the chaplain ’ s other side inton with reverenti sorrow . “ we ’ re from the govern . we want to ask you some questions. ” “ what kind of question ? what ’ s the matter ? ” “ aren ’ t you chaplain shipman ? ” demand the obes colonel . “ he ’ s the one , ” sergeant whitcomb answer . “ go on along with them , ” captain black call out to the chaplain with a hostil and contemptu sneer . “ go on into the car if you know what ’ s good for you. ” hand were draw the chaplain away irresist . he want to shout for help to yossarian , who seem too far away to hear . some of the men nearbi were begin to look at him with awaken curios . the chaplain bent hi face away with burn shame and allow himself to be led into the rear of a staff car and seat between the fat colonel with the larg , pink face and the skinni , unctuou , despond major . he automat held a wrist out to each , wonder for a moment if they want to handcuff him . anoth offic wa alreadi in the front seat . a tall m.p . with a whistl and a white helmet got in behind the wheel . the chaplain did not dare rais hi eye until the close car had lurch from the area and the speed wheel were whine on the bumpi blacktop road . “ where are you take me ? ” he ask in a voic soft with timid and guilt , hi gaze still avert . the notion came to him that they were hold him to blame for the mid-air crash and the death of nate . “ what have i done ? ” “ whi don ’ t you keep your trap shut and let us ask the question ? ” said the colonel . “ don ’ t talk to him that way , ” said the major . “ it isn ’ t necessari to be so disrespectful. ” “ then tell him to keep hi trap shut and let us ask the questions. ” “ father , pleas keep your trap shut and let us ask the question , ” urg the major sympathet . “ it will be better for you. ” “ it isn ’ t necessari to call me father , ” said the chaplain . “ i ’ m not a catholic. ” “ neither am i , father , ” said the major . “ it ’ s just that i ’ m a veri devout person , and i like to call all men of god father. ” “ he doesn ’ t even believ there are atheist in foxhol , ” the colonel mock , and nudg the chaplain in the rib familiarli . “ go on , chaplain , tell him . are there atheist in foxhol ? ” “ i don ’ t know , sir , ” the chaplain repli . “ i ’ ve never been in a foxhole. ” the offic in front swung hi head around swiftli with a quarrelsom express . “ you ’ ve never been in heaven either , have you ? but you know there ’ s a heaven , don ’ t you ? ” “ or do you ? ” said the colonel . “ that ’ s a veri seriou crime you ’ ve commit , father , ” said the major . “ what crime ? ” “ we don ’ t know yet , ” said the colonel . “ but we ’ re go to find out . and we sure know it ’ s veri serious. ” the car swung off the road at group headquart with a squeal of tire , slacken speed onli slightli , and continu around past the park lot to the back of the build . the three offic and the chaplain got out . in singl file , they usher him down a wobbl flight of wooden stair lead to the basement and led him into a damp , gloomi room with a low cement ceil and unfinish stone wall . there were cobweb in all the corner . a huge centiped blew across the floor to the shelter of a water pipe . they sat the chaplain in a hard , straight-back chair that stood behind a small , bare tabl . “ pleas make yourself comfort , chaplain , ” invit the colonel cordial , switch on a blind spotlight and shoot it squar into the chaplain ’ s face . he place a set of brass knuckl and box of wooden match on the tabl . “ we want you to relax. ” the chaplain ’ s eye bulg out incredul . hi teeth chatter and hi limb felt utterli without strength . he wa powerless . they might do whatev they wish to him , he realiz ; these brutal men might beat him to death right there in the basement , and no one would interven to save him , no one , perhap , but the devout and sympathet major with the sharp face , who set a water tap drip loudli into a sink and return to the tabl to lay a length of heavi rubber hose down besid the brass knuckl . “ everyth ’ s go to be all right , chaplain , ” the major said encouragingli . “ you ’ ve got noth to be afraid of if you ’ re not guilti . what are you so afraid of ? you ’ re not guilti , are you ? ” “ sure he ’ s guilti , ” said the colonel . “ guilti as hell. ” “ guilti of what ? ” implor the chaplain , feel more and more bewild and not know which of the men to appeal to for merci . the third offic wore no insignia and lurk in silenc off to the side . “ what did i do ? ” “ that ’ s just what we ’ re go to find out , ” answer the colonel , and he shove a pad and pencil across the tabl to the chaplain . “ write your name for us , will you ? in your own handwriting. ” “ my own handwrit ? ” “ that ’ s right . anywher on the page. ” when the chaplain had finish , the colonel took the pad back and held it up alongsid a sheet of paper he remov from a folder . “ see ? ” he said to the major , who had come to hi side and wa peer solemnli over hi shoulder . “ they ’ re not the same , are they ? ” the major admit . “ i told you he did it. ” “ did what ? ” ask the chaplain . “ chaplain , thi come as a great shock to me , ” the major accus in a tone of heavi lament . “ what doe ? ” “ i can ’ t tell you how disappoint i am in you. ” “ for what ? ” persist the chaplain more fiantic . “ what have i done ? ” “ for thi , ” repli the major , and , with an air of disillus disgust , toss down on the tabl the pad on which the chaplain had sign hi name . “ thi isn ’ t your handwriting. ” the chaplain blink rapidli with amaz . “ but of cours it ’ s my handwriting. ” “ no it isn ’ t , chaplain . you ’ re lie again. ” “ but i just wrote it ! ” the chaplain cri in exasper . “ you saw me write it. ” “ that ’ s just it , ” the major answer bitterli . “ i saw you write it . you can ’ t deni that you did write it . a person who ’ ll lie about hi own handwrit will lie about anything. ” “ but who lie about my own handwrit ? ” demand the chaplain , forget hi fear in the wave of anger and indign that well up insid him suddenli . “ are you crazi or someth ? what are you both talk about ? ” “ we ask you to write your name in your own handwrit . and you didn ’ t do it. ” “ but of cours i did . in whose handwrit did i write it if not my own ? ” “ in somebodi els ’ s. ” “ whose ? ” “ that ’ s just what we ’ re go to find out , ” threaten the colonel . “ talk , chaplain. ” the chaplain look from one to the other of the two men with rise doubt and hysteria . “ that handwrit is mine , ” he maintain passion . “ where els is my handwrit , if that isn ’ t it ? ” “ right here , ” answer the colonel . and look veri superior , he toss down on the tabl a photostat copi of a piec of v mail in which everyth but the salut “ dear mari ” had been block out and on which the censor offic had written , “ i long for you tragic . r. o. shipman , chaplain , u.s. army. ” the colonel smile scorn as he watch the chaplain ’ s face turn crimson . “ well , chaplain ? do you know who wrote that ? ” the chaplain took a long moment to repli ; he had recogn yossarian ’ s handwrit . “ no. ” “ you can read , though , can ’ t you ? ” the colonel persev sarcast . “ the author sign hi name. ” “ that ’ s my name there. ” “ then you wrote it . q.e.d. ” “ but i didn ’ t write it . that isn ’ t my handwrit , either. ” “ then you sign your name in somebodi els ’ s handwrit again , ” the colonel retort with a shrug . “ that ’ s all that means. ” “ oh , thi is ridicul ! ” the chaplain shout , suddenli lose all patienc . he jump to hi feet in a blaze furi , both fist clench . “ i ’ m not go to stand for thi ani longer ! do you hear ? twelv men were just kill , and i have no time for these silli question . you ’ ve no right to keep me here , and i ’ m just not go to stand for it. ” without say a word , the colonel push the chaplain ’ s chest hard and knock him back down into the chair , and the chaplain wa suddenli weak and veri much afraid again . the major pick up the length of rubber hose and began tap it menacingli against hi open palm . the colonel lift the box of match , took one out and held it pois against the strike surfac , watch with glower eye for the chaplain ’ s next sign of defianc . the chaplain wa pale and almost too petrifi to move . the bright glare of the spotlight made him turn away final ; the drip water wa louder and almost unbear irrit . he wish they would tell him what they want so that he would know what to confess . he wait tens as the third offic , at a signal from the colonel , ambl over from the wall and seat himself on the tabl just a few inch away from the chaplain . hi face wa expressionless , hi eye penetr and cold . “ turn off the light , ” he said over hi shoulder in a low , calm voic . “ it ’ s veri annoying. ” the chaplain gave him a small smile of gratitud . “ thank you , sir . and the drip too , please. ” “ leav the drip , ” said the offic . “ that doesn ’ t bother me. ” he tug up the leg of hi trouser a bit , as though to preserv their natti creas . “ chaplain , ” he ask casual , “ of what religi persuas are you ? ” “ i ’ m an anabaptist , sir. ” “ that ’ s a pretti suspici religion , isn ’ t it ? ” “ suspici ? ” inquir the chaplain in a kind of innoc daze . “ whi , sir ? ” “ well , i don ’ t know a thing about it . you ’ ll have to admit that , won ’ t you ? doesn ’ t that make it pretti suspici ? ” “ i don ’ t know , sir , ” the chaplain answer diplomat , with an uneasi stammer . he found the man ’ s lack of insignia disconcert and wa not even sure he had to say “ sir ” . who wa he ? and what author had he to interrog him ? “ chaplain , i onc studi latin . i think it ’ s onli fair to warn you of that befor i ask my next question . doesn ’ t the word anabaptist simpli mean that you ’ re not a baptist ? ” “ oh , no , sir . there ’ s much more. ” “ are you a baptist ? ” “ no , sir. ” “ then you are not a baptist , aren ’ t you ? ” “ sir ? ” “ i don ’ t see whi you ’ re bicker with me on that point . you ’ ve alreadi admit it . now , chaplain , to say you ’ re not a baptist doesn ’ t realli tell us anyth about what you are , doe it ? you could be anyth or anyone. ” he lean forward slightli and hi manner took on a shrewd and signific air . “ you could even be , ” he ad , “ washington irv , couldn ’ t you ? ” “ washington irv ? ” the chaplain repeat with surpris . “ come on , washington , ” the corpul colonel broke in irasc . “ whi don ’ t you make a clean breast of it ? we know you stole that plum tomato. ” after a moment ’ s shock , the chaplain giggl with nervou relief . “ oh , is that it ! ” he exclaim . “ now i ’ m begin to understand . i didn ’ t steal that plum tomato , sir . colonel cathcart gave it to me . you can even ask him if you don ’ t believ me. ” a door open at the other end of the room and colonel cathcart step into the basement as though from a closet . “ hello , colonel . colonel , he claim you gave him that plum tomato . did you ? ” “ whi should i give him a plum tomato ? ” answer colonel cathcart . “ thank you , colonel . that will be all. ” “ it ’ s a pleasur , colonel , ” colonel cathcart repli , and he step back out of the basement , close the door after him . “ well , chaplain ? what have you got to say now ? ” “ he did give it to me ! ” the chaplain hiss in a whisper that wa both fierc and fear . “ he did give it to me ! ” “ you ’ re not call a superior offic a liar are you , chaplain ? ” “ whi should a superior offic give you a plum tomato , chaplain ? ” “ is that whi you tri to give it to sergeant whitcomb , chaplain ? becaus it wa a hot tomato ? ” “ no , no , no , ” the chaplain protest , wonder miser whi they were not abl to understand . “ i offer it to sergeant whitcomb becaus i didn ’ t want it. ” “ whi ’ d you steal it from colonel cathcart if you didn ’ t want it ? ” “ i didn ’ t steal it from colonel cathcard ” “ then whi are you so guilti , if you didn ’ t steal it ? ” “ i ’ m not guilti ! ” “ then whi would we be question you if you weren ’ t guilti ? ” “ oh , i don ’ t know , ” the chaplain groan , knead hi finger in hi lap and shake hi bow and anguish head . “ i don ’ t know. ” “ he think we have time to wast , ” snort the major . “ chaplain , ” resum the offic without insignia at a more leisur pace , lift a typewritten sheet of yellow paper from the open folder , “ i have a sign statement here from colonel cathcart assert you stole that plum tomato from him. ” he lay the sheet face down on one side of the folder and pick up a second page from the other side . “ and i have a notar affidavit from sergeant whitcomb in which he state that he knew the tomato wa hot just from the way you tri to unload it on him. ” “ i swear to god i didn ’ t steal it , sir , ” the chaplain plead with distress , almost in tear . “ i give you my sacr word it wa not a hot tomato. ” “ chaplain , do you believ in god ? ” “ ye , sir . of cours i do. ” “ that ’ s odd , chaplain , ” said the offic , take from the folder anoth typewritten yellow page , “ becaus i have here in my hand now anoth statement from colonel cathcart in which he swear that you refus to co-oper with him in conduct prayer meet in the brief room befor each mission. ” after look blank a moment , the chaplain nod quickli with recollect . “ oh , that ’ s not quit true , sir , ” he explain eagerli . “ colonel cathcart gave up the idea himself onc he realiz enlist men pray to the same god as officers. ” “ he did what ? ” exclaim the offic in disbelief . “ what nonsens ! ” declar the red-fac colonel , and swung away from the chaplain with digniti and annoy . “ doe he expect us to believ that ? ” cri the major incredul . the offic without insignia chuckl acidli . “ chaplain , aren ’ t you stretch thing a bit far now ? ” he inquir with a smile that wa indulg and unfriendli . “ but , sir , it ’ s the truth , sir ! i swear it ’ s the truth. ” “ i don ’ t see how that matter one way or the other , ” the offic answer nonchalantli , and reach sideway again toward the open folder fill with paper . “ chaplain , did you say you did believ in god in answer to my question ? i don ’ t remember. ” “ ye , sir . i did say so , sir . i do believ in god. ” “ then that realli is veri odd , chaplain , becaus i have here anoth affidavit from colonel cathcart that state you onc told him atheism wa not against the law . do you recal ever make a statement like that to anyon ? ” the chaplain nod without ani hesit , feel himself on veri solid ground now . “ ye , sir , i did make a statement like that . i made it becaus it ’ s true . atheism is not against the law. ” “ but that ’ s still no reason to say so , chaplain , is it ? ” the offic chide tartli , frown , and pick up still one more typewritten , notar page from the folder . “ and here i have anoth sworn statement from sergeant whitcomb that say you oppos hi plan of send letter of condol over colonel cathcart ’ s signatur to the next of kin of men kill or wound in combat . is that true ? ” “ ye , sir , i did oppos it , ” answer the chaplain . “ and i ’ m proud that i did . those letter are insincer and dishonest . their onli purpos is to bring glori to colonel cathcart. ” “ but what differ doe that make ? ” repli the offic . “ they still bring solac and comfort to the famili that receiv them , don ’ t they ? chaplain , i simpli can ’ t understand your think process. ” the chaplain wa stump and at a complet loss for a repli . he hung hi head , feel tongue-ti and naiv . the ruddi stout colonel step forward vigor with a sudden idea . “ whi don ’ t we knock hi goddam brain out ? ” he suggest with robust enthusiasm to the other . “ ye , we could knock hi goddam brain out , couldn ’ t we ? ” the hawk-fac major agre . “ he ’ s onli an anabaptist. ” “ no , we ’ ve got to find him guilti first , ” the offic without insignia caution with a languid restrain wave . he slid lightli to the floor and move around to the other side of the tabl , face the chaplain with both hand press flat on the surfac . hi express wa dark and veri stern , squar and forbid . “ chaplain , ” he announc with magisteri rigid , “ we charg you formal with be washington irv and take caprici and unlicens liberti in censor the letter of offic and enlist men . are you guilti or innoc ? ” “ innoc , sir. ” the chaplain lick dri lip with a dri tongu and lean forward in suspens on the edg of hi chair . “ guilti , ” said the colonel . “ guilti , ” said the major . “ guilti it is , then , ” remark the offic without insignia , and wrote a word on a page in the folder . “ chaplain , ” he continu , look up , “ we accus you also of the commiss of crime and infract we don ’ t even know about yet . guilti or innoc ? ” “ i don ’ t know , sir . how can i say if you don ’ t tell me what they are ? ” “ how can we tell you if we don ’ t know ? ” “ guilti , ” decid the colonel . “ sure he ’ s guilti , ” agre the major . “ if they ’ re hi crime and infract , he must have commit them. ” “ guilti it is , then , ” chant the offic without insignia , and move off to the side of the room . “ he ’ s all your , colonel. ” “ thank you , ” commend the colonel . “ you did a veri good job. ” he turn to the chaplain . “ okay , chaplain , the jig ’ s up . take a walk. ” the chaplain did not understand . “ what do you wish me to do ? ” “ go on , beat it , i told you ! ” the colonel roar , jerk a thumb over hi shoulder angrili . “ get the hell out of here. ” the chaplain wa shock by hi bellicos word and tone and , to hi own amaz and mystif , deepli chagrin that they were turn him loos . “ aren ’ t you even go to punish me ? ” he inquir with querul surpris . “ you ’ re damn right we ’ re go to punish you . but we ’ re certainli not go to let you hang around while we decid how and when to do it . so get go . hit the road. ” the chaplain rose tent and took a few step away . “ i ’ m free to go ? ” “ for the time be . but don ’ t tri to leav the island . we ’ ve got your number , chaplain . just rememb that we ’ ve got you under surveil twenty-four hour a day. ” it wa not conceiv that they would allow him to leav . the chaplain walk toward the exit gingerli , expect at ani instant to be order back by a peremptori voic or halt in hi track by a heavi blow on the shoulder or the head . they did noth to stop him . he found hi way through the stale , dark , dank corridor to the flight of stair . he wa stagger and pant when he climb out into the fresh air . as soon as he had escap , a feel of overwhelm moral outrag fill him . he wa furiou , more furiou at the atroc of the day than he had ever felt befor in hi whole life . he swept through the spaciou , echo lobbi of the build in a temper of scald and vindict resent . he wa not go to stand for it ani more , he told himself , he wa simpli not go to stand for it . when he reach the entranc , he spi , with a feel of good fortun , colonel korn trot up the wide step alon . brace himself with a deep breath , the chaplain move courag forward to intercept him . “ colonel , i ’ m not go to stand for it ani more , ” he declar with vehement determin , and watch in dismay as colonel korn went trot by up the step without even notic him . “ colonel korn ! ” the tubbi , loos figur of hi superior offic stop , turn and came trot back down slowli . “ what is it , chaplain ? ” “ colonel korn , i want to talk to you about the crash thi morn . it wa a terribl thing to happen , terribl ! ” colonel korn wa silent a moment , regard the chaplain with a glint of cynic amus . “ ye , chaplain , it certainli wa terribl , ” he said final . “ i don ’ t know how we ’ re go to write thi one up without make ourselv look bad. ” “ that isn ’ t what i meant , ” the chaplain scold firmli without ani fear at all . “ some of those twelv men had alreadi finish their seventi missions. ” colonel korn laugh . “ would it be ani less terribl if they had all been new men ? ” he inquir caustic . onc again the chaplain wa stump . immor logic seem to be confound him at everi turn . he wa less sure of himself than befor when he continu , and hi voic waver . “ sir , it just isn ’ t right to make the men in thi group fli eighti mission when the men in other group are be sent home with fifti and fifty-five. ” “ we ’ ll take the matter under consider , ” colonel korn said with bore disinterest , and start away . “ adio , padre. ” “ what doe that mean , sir ? ” the chaplain persist in a voic turn shrill . colonel korn stop with an unpleas express and took a step back down . “ it mean we ’ ll think about it , padr , ” he answer with sarcasm and contempt . “ you wouldn ’ t want us to do anyth without think about it , would you ? ” “ no , sir , i suppos not . but you have been think about it , haven ’ t you ? ” “ ye , padr , we have been think about it . but to make you happi , we ’ ll think about it some more , and you ’ ll be the first person we ’ ll tell if we reach a new decis . and now , adios. ” colonel korn whirl away again and hurri up the stair . “ colonel korn ! ” the chaplain ’ s cri made colonel korn stop onc more . hi head swung slowli around toward the chaplain with a look of moros impati . word gush from the chaplain in a nervou torrent . “ sir , i would like your permiss to take the matter to gener dreedl . i want to bring my protest to wing headquarters. ” colonel korn ’ s thick , dark jowl inflat unexpectedli with a suppress guffaw , and it took him a moment to repli . “ that ’ s all right , padr , ” he answer with mischiev merriment , tri hard to keep a straight face . “ you have my permiss to speak to gener dreedle. ” “ thank you , sir . i believ it onli fair to warn you that i think i have some influenc with gener dreedle. ” “ it ’ s good of you to warn me , padr . and i believ it onli fair to warn you that you won ’ t find gener dreedl at wing. ” colonel korn grin wickedli and then broke into triumphant laughter . “ gener dreedl is out , padr . and gener peckem is in . we have a new wing commander. ” the chaplain wa stun . “ gener peckem ! ” “ that ’ s right , chaplain . have you got ani influenc with him ? ” “ whi , i don ’ t even know gener peckem , ” the chaplain protest wretchedli . colonel korn laugh again . “ that ’ s too bad , chaplain , becaus colonel cathcart know him veri well. ” colonel korn chuckl steadili with gloat relish for anoth second or two and then stop abruptli . “ and by the way , padr , ” he warn coldli , poke hi finger onc into the chaplain ’ s chest . “ the jig is up between you and dr. stubb . we know veri well he sent you up here to complain today. ” “ dr . stubb ? ” the chaplain shook hi head in baffl protest . “ i haven ’ t seen dr. stubb , colonel . i wa brought here by three strang offic who took me down into the cellar without author and question and insult me. ” colonel korn poke the chaplain in the chest onc more . “ you know damn well dr. stubb ha been tell the men in hi squadron they didn ’ t have to fli more than seventi missions. ” he laugh harshli . “ well , padr , they do have to fli more than seventi mission , becaus we ’ re transfer dr. stubb to the pacif . so adio , padr . adios. ” 37 gener scheisskopf dreedl wa out , and gener peckem wa in , and gener peckem had hardli move insid gener dreedl ’ s offic to replac him when hi splendid militari victori began fall to piec around him . “ gener scheisskopf ? ” he inquir unsuspectingli of the sergeant in hi new offic who brought him word of the order that had come in that morn . “ you mean colonel scheisskopf , don ’ t you ? ” “ no , sir , gener scheisskopf he wa promot to gener thi morn , sir. ” “ well , that ’ s certainli curiou ! scheisskopf ? a gener ? what grade ? ” “ lieuten gener , sir , and- “ “ lieuten gener ! ” “ ye , sir , and he want you to issu no order to anyon in your command without first clear them through him. ” “ well , i ’ ll be damn , ” muse gener peckem with astonish , swear aloud for perhap the first time in hi life . “ cargil , did you hear that ? scheisskopf wa promot way up to lieuten gener . i ’ ll bet that promot wa intend for me and they gave it to him by mistake. ” colonel cargil had been rub hi sturdi chin reflect . “ whi is he give order to us ? ” gener peckem ’ s sleek , scrub , distinguish face tighten . “ ye , sergeant , ” he said slowli with an uncomprehend frown . “ whi is he issu order to us if he ’ s still in special servic and we ’ re in combat oper ? ” “ that ’ s anoth chang that wa made thi morn , sir . all combat oper are now under the jurisdict of special servic . gener scheisskopf is our new command officer. ” gener peckem let out a sharp cri . “ oh , my god ! ” he wail , and all hi practic composur went up in hysteria . “ scheisskopf in charg ? scheisskopf ? ” he press hi fist down on hi eye with horror . “ cargil , get me wintergreen ! scheisskopf ? not scheisskopf ! ” all phone began ring at onc . a corpor ran in and salut . “ sir , there ’ s a chaplain outsid to see you with news of an injustic in colonel cathcart ’ s squadron. ” “ send him away , send him away ! we ’ ve got enough injustic of our own . where ’ s wintergreen ? ” “ sir , gener scheisskopf is on the phone . he want to speak to you at once. ” “ tell him i haven ’ t arriv yet . good lord ! ” gener peckem scream , as though struck by the enorm of the disast for the first time . “ scheisskopf ? the man ’ s a moron ! i walk all over that blockhead , and now he ’ s my superior offic . oh , my lord ! cargil ! cargil , don ’ t desert me ! where ’ s wintergreen ? ” “ sir , i have an ex-serg wintergreen on your other telephon . he ’ s been tri to reach you all morning. ” “ gener , i can ’ t get wintergreen , ” colonel cargil shout , “ hi line is busy. ” gener peckem wa perspir freeli as he lung for the other telephon . “ wintergreen ! ” “ peckem , you son of a bitch- “ “ wintergreen , have you heard what they ’ ve done ? ” “ -what have you done , you stupid bastard ? ” “ they put scheisskopf in charg of everyth ! ” wintergreen wa shriek with rage and panic . “ you and your goddam memorandum ! they ’ ve gone and transfer combat oper to special servic ! ” “ oh , no , ” moan gener peckem . “ is that what did it ? my memoranda ? is that what made them put scheisskopf in charg ? whi didn ’ t they put me in charg ? ” “ becaus you weren ’ t in special servic ani more . you transfer out and left him in charg . and do you know what he want ? do you know what the bastard want us all to do ? ” “ sir , i think you ’ d better talk to gener scheisskopf , ” plead the sergeant nervous . “ he insist on speak to someone. ” “ cargil , talk to scheisskopf for me . i can ’ t do it . find out what he wants. ” colonel cargil listen to gener scheisskopf for a moment and went white as a sheet . “ oh , my god ! ” he cri , as the phone fell from hi finger . “ do you know what he want ? he want us to march . he want everybodi to march ! ” 38 kid sister yossarian march backward with hi gun on hi hip and refus to fli ani more mission . he march backward becaus he wa contin spin around as he walk to make certain no one wa sneak up on him from behind . everi sound to hi rear wa a warn , everi person he pass a potenti assassin . he kept hi hand on hi gun butt constantli and smile at no one but hungri joe . he told captain piltchard and captain wren that he wa through fli . captain piltchard and captain wren left hi name off the flight schedul for the next mission and report the matter to group headquart . colonel korn laugh cahnli . “ what the devil do you mean , he won ’ t fli more mission ? ” he ask with a smile , as colonel cathcart crept away into a corner to brood about the sinist import of the name yossarian pop up to plagu him onc again . “ whi won ’ t he ? ” “ hi friend nate wa kill in the crash over spezia . mayb that ’ s why. ” “ who doe he think he is-achil ? ” colonel korn wa pleas with the simil and file a mental remind to repeat it the next time he found himself in gener peckem ’ s presenc . “ he ha to fli more mission . he ha no choic . go back and tell him you ’ ll report the matter to us if he doesn ’ t chang hi mind. ” “ we alreadi did tell him that , sir . it made no difference. ” “ what doe major major say ? ” “ we never see major major . he seem to have disappeared. ” “ i wish we could disappear him ! ” colonel cathcart blurt out from the corner peevishli . “ the way they did that fellow dunbar. ” “ oh , there are plenti of other way we can handl thi one , ” colonel korn assur him confid , and continu to piltchard and wren , “ let ’ s begin with the kindest . send him to rome for a rest for a few day . mayb thi fellow ’ s death realli did hurt him a bit. ” nate ’ s death , in fact , almost kill yossarian too , for when he broke the news to nate ’ s whore in rome she utter a pierc , heartbroken shriek and tri to stab him to death with a potato peeler . “ bruto ! ” she howl at him in hyster furi as he bent her arm up around behind her back and twist gradual until the potato peeler drop from her grasp . “ bruto ! bruto ! ” she lash at him swiftli with the long-nail finger of her free hand and rake open hi cheek . she spat in hi face vicious . “ what ’ s the matter ? ” he scream in sting pain and bewilder , fling her away from him all the way across the room to the wall . “ what do you want from me ? ” she flew back at him with both fist flail and bloodi hi mouth with a solid punch befor he wa abl to grab her wrist and hold her still . her hair toss wildli . tear were stream in singl torrent from her flash , hate-fil eye as she struggl against him fierc in an irrat frenzi of madden might , snarl and curs savag and scream “ bruto ! bruto ! ” each time he tri to explain . her great strength caught him off guard , and he lost hi foot . she wa nearli as tall as yossarian , and for a few fantast , terror-fil moment he wa certain she would overpow him in her craze determin , crush him to the ground and rip him apart mercilessli limb from limb for some heinou crime he had never commit . he want to yell for help as they strove against each other frantic in a grunt , pant stalem , arm against arm . at last she weaken , and he wa abl to forc her back and plead with her to let him talk , swear to her that nate ’ s death had not been hi fault . she spat in hi face again , and he push her away hard in disgust anger and frustrat . she hurl herself down toward the potato peeler the instant he releas her . he flung himself down after her , and they roll over each other on the floor sever time befor he could tear the potato peeler away . she tri to trip him with her hand as he scrambl to hi feet and scratch an excruci chunk out of hi ankl . he hop across the room in pain and threw the potato peeler out the window . he heav a huge sigh of relief onc he saw he wa safe . “ now , pleas let me explain someth to you , ” he cajol in a matur , reason , earnest voic . she kick him in the groin . whoosh ! went the air out of him , and he sank down on hi side with a shrill and ulul cri , doubl up over hi knee in chaotic agoni and retch for breath . nate ’ s whore ran from the room . yossarian stagger up to hi feet not a moment too soon , for she came charg back in from the kitchen carri a long bread knife . a moan of incredul dismay waft from hi lip as , still clutch hi throb , tender , burn bowel in both hand , he drop hi full weight down against her shin and knock her leg out from under her . she flip complet over hi head and land on the floor on her elbow with a jar thud . the knife skitter free , and he slap it out of sight under the bed . she tri to lung after it , and he seiz her by the arm and yank her up . she tri to kick him in the groin again , and he slung her away with a violent oath of hi own . she slam into the wall off balanc and smash a chair over into a vaniti tabl cover with comb , hairbrush and cosmet jar that all went crash off . a frame pictur fell to the floor at the other end of the room , the glass front shatter . “ what do you want from me ? ” he yell at her in whine and exasper confus . “ i didn ’ t kill him. ” she hurl a heavi glass ash tray at hi head . he made a fist and want to punch her in the stomach when she came charg at him again , but he wa afraid he might harm her . he want to clip her veri neatli on the point of the jaw and run from the room , but there wa no clear target , and he mere skip asid neatli at the last second and help her along past him with a strong shove . she bang hard against the other wall . now she wa block the door . she threw a larg vase at him . then she came at him with a full wine bottl and struck him squar on the templ , knock him down half-stun on one knee . hi ear were buzz , hi whole face wa numb . more than anyth els , he wa embarrass . he felt awkward becaus she wa go to murder him . he simpli did not understand what wa go on . he had no idea what to do . but he did know he had to save himself , and he catapult forward off the floor when he saw her rais the wine bottl to clout him again and barrel into her midriff befor she could strike him . he had momentum , and he propel her befor him backward in hi drive rush until her knee buckl against the side of the bed and she fell over onto the mattress with yossarian sprawl on top of her between her leg . she plung her nail into the side of hi neck and goug as he work hi way up the suppl , full hill and ledg of her round bodi until he cover her complet and press her into submiss , hi finger pursu her thrash arm persist until they arriv at the wine bottl final and wrench it free . she wa still kick and curs and scratch feroci . she tri to bite him cruelli , her coars , sensual lip stretch back over her teeth like an enrag omnivor beast ’ s . now that she lay captiv beneath him , he wonder how he would ever escap her without leav himself vulner . he could feel the tens , straddl insid of her buffet thigh and knee squeez and churn around one of hi leg . he wa stir by thought of sex that made him asham . he wa consciou of the voluptu flesh of her firm , young-woman ’ s bodi strain and beat against him like a humid , fluid , delect , unyield tide , her belli and warm , live , plastic breast thrust upward against him vigor in sweet and menac temptat . her breath wa scald . all at onc he realized-though the writh turbul beneath him had not diminish one whit-that she wa no longer grappl with him , recogn with a quiver that she wa not fight him but heav her pelvi up against him remorselessli in the primal , power , rhapsod instinctu rhythm of erot ardor and abandon . he gasp in delight surpris . her face-a beauti as a bloom flower to him now-wa distort with a new kind of tortur , the tissu seren swollen , her half-clos eye misti and unse with the stultifi languor of desir . “ caro , ” she murmur hoars as though from the depth of a tranquil and luxuri tranc . “ ooooh , caro mio. ” he stroke her hair . she drove her mouth against hi face with savag passion . he lick her neck . she wrap her arm around him and hug . he felt himself fall , fall ecstat in love with her as she kiss him again and again with lip that were steam and wet and soft and hard , mumbl deep sound to him adoringli in an incoher oblivion of raptur , one caress hand on hi back slip deftli down insid hi trouser belt while the other grope secretli and treacher about on the floor for the bread knife and found it . he save himself just in time . she still want to kill him ! he wa shock and astound by her deprav subterug as he tore the knife from her grasp and hurl it away . he bound out of the bed to hi feet . hi face wa agog with befuddl and disillus . he did not know whether to dart through the door to freedom or collaps on the bed to fall in love with her and place himself abjectli at her merci again . she spare him from do either by burst unpredict into tear . he wa stun again . thi time she wept with no other emot than grief , profound , debilit , humbl grief , forget all about him . her desol wa pathet as she sat with her tempestu , proud , love head bow , her shoulder sag , her spirit melt . thi time there wa no mistak her anguish . great rack sob choke and shook her . she wa no longer awar of him , no longer care . he could have walk from the room safe then . but he chose to remain and consol and help her . “ pleas , ” he urg her inarticul with hi arm about her shoulder , recollect with pain sad how inarticul and enfeebl he had felt in the plane come back from avignon when snowden kept whimper to him that he wa cold , he wa cold , and all yossarian could offer him in return wa “ there , there . there , there. ” “ pleas , ” he repeat to her sympathet . “ pleas , please. ” she rest against him and cri until she seem too weak to cri ani longer , and did not look at him onc until he extend hi handkerchief when she had finish . she wipe her cheek with a tini , polit smile and gave the handkerchief back , murmur “ grazi , grazi ” with meek , maidenli proprieti , and then , without ani warn whatsoev of a chang in mood , claw suddenli at hi eye with both hand . she land with each and let out a victori shriek . “ ha ! assassino ! ” she hoot , and race joyous across the room for the bread knife to finish him off . half blind , he rose and stumbl after her . a nois behind him made him turn . hi sens reel in horror at what he saw . nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister , of all peopl , wa come after him with anoth long bread knife ! “ oh , no , ” he wail with a shudder , and he knock the knife out of her hand with a sharp downward blow on her wrist . he lost patienc entir with the whole grotesqu and incomprehens mele . there wa no tell who might lung at him next through the doorway with anoth long bread knife , and he lift nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister off the floor , threw her at nate ’ s whore and ran out of the room , out of the apart and down the stair . the two girl chase out into the hall after him . he heard their footstep lag farther and farther behind as he fled and then ceas altogeth . he heard sob directli overhead . glanc backward up the stair well , he spi nate ’ s whore sit in a heap on one of the step , weep with her face in both hand , while her pagan , irrepress kid sister hung danger over the banist shout “ bruto ! bruto ! ” down at him happili and brandish her bread knife at him as though it were an excit new toy she wa eager to use . yossarian escap , but kept look back over hi shoulder anxious as he retreat through the street . peopl stare at him strang , make him more apprehens . he walk in nervou hast , wonder what there wa in hi appear that caught everyon ’ s attent . when he touch hi hand to a sore spot on hi forehead , hi finger turn gooey with blood , and he understood . he dab hi face and neck with a handkerchief . wherev it press , he pick up new red smudg . he wa bleed everywher . he hurri into the red cross build and down the two steep flight of white marbl stair to the men ’ s washroom , where he cleans and nurs hi innumer visibl wound with cold water and soap and straighten hi shirt collar and comb hi hair . he had never seen a face so badli bruis and scratch as the one still blink back at him in the mirror with a daze and startl uneasi . what on earth had she want from him ? when he left the men ’ s room , nate ’ s whore wa wait outsid in ambush . she wa crouch against the wall near the bottom of the staircas and came pounc down upon him like a hawk with a glitter silver steak knife in her fist . he broke the brunt of her assault with hi uprais elbow and punch her neatli on the jaw . her eye roll . he caught her befor she drop and sat her down gentli . then he ran up the step and out of the build and spent the next three hour hunt through the citi for hungri joe so that he could get away from rome befor she could find him again . he did not feel realli safe until the plane had taken off . when they land in pianosa , nate ’ s whore , disguis in a mechan ’ s green overal , wa wait with her steak knife exactli where the plane stop , and all that save him as she stab at hi chest in her leather-sol high-heel shoe wa the gravel underfoot that made her feet roll out from under her . yossarian , astound , haul her up into the plane and held her motionless on the floor in a doubl armlock while hungri joe radio the control tower for permiss to return to rome . at the airport in rome , yossarian dump her out of the plane on the taxi strip , and hungri joe took right off for pianosa again without even cut hi engin . scarc breath , yossarian scrutin everi figur warili as he and hungri joe walk back through the squadron toward their tent . hungri joe eye him steadili with a funni express . “ are you sure you didn ’ t imagin the whole thing ? ” hungri joe inquir hesitantli after a while . “ imagin it ? you were right there with me , weren ’ t you ? you just flew her back to rome. ” “ mayb i imagin the whole thing , too . whi doe she want to kill you for ? ” “ she never did like me . mayb it ’ s becaus i broke hi nose , or mayb it ’ s becaus i wa the onli one in sight she could hate when she got the news . do you think she ’ ll come back ? ” yossarian went to the offic ’ club that night and stay veri late . he kept a leeri eye out for nate ’ s whore as he approach hi tent . he stop when he saw her hide in the bush around the side , grip a huge carv knife and all dress up to look like a pianosan farmer . yossarian tipto around the back noiselessli and seiz her from behind . “ caramba ! ” she exclaim in a rage , and resist like a wildcat as he drag her insid the tent and hurl her down on the floor . “ hey , what ’ s go on ? ” queri one of hi roommat drowsili . “ hold her till i get back , ” yossarian order , yank him out of bed on top of her and run out . “ hold her ! ” “ let me kill him and i ’ ll ficky-fick you all , ” she offer . the other roommat leap out of their cot when they saw it wa a girl and tri to make her ficky-fick them all first as yossarian ran to get hungri joe , who wa sleep like a babi . yossarian lift hupl ’ s cat off hungri joe ’ s face and shook him awak . hungri joe dress rapidli . thi time they flew the plane north and turn in over itali far behind the enemi line . when they were over level land , they strap a parachut on nate ’ s whore and shove her out the escap hatch . yossarian wa posit that he wa at last rid of her and wa reliev . as he approach hi tent back in pianosa , a figur rear up in the dark right besid the path , and he faint . he came to sit on the ground and wait for the knife to strike him , almost welcom the mortal blow for the peac it would bring . a friendli hand help him up instead . it belong to a pilot in dunbar ’ s squadron . “ how are you do ? ” ask the pilot , whisper . “ pretti good , ” yossarian answer . “ i saw you fall down just now . i thought someth happen to you. ” “ i think i fainted. ” “ there ’ s a rumor in my squadron that you told them you weren ’ t go to fli ani more combat missions. ” “ that ’ s the truth. ” “ then they came around from group and told us that the rumor wasn ’ t true , that you were just kid around. ” “ that wa a lie. ” “ do you think they ’ ll let you get away with it ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ what will they do to you ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ do you think they ’ ll court-marti you for desert in the face of the enemi ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ i hope you get away with it , ” said the pilot in dunbar ’ s squadron , steal out of sight into the shadow . “ let me know how you ’ re doing. ” yossarian stare after him a few second and continu toward hi tent . “ pssst ! ” said a voic a few pace onward . it wa applebi , hide in back of a tree . “ how are you do ? ” “ pretti good , ” said yossarian . “ i heard them say they were go to threaten to court-marti you for desert in the face of the enemi . but that they wouldn ’ t tri to go through with it becaus they ’ re not even sure they ’ ve got a case against you on that . and becaus it might make them look bad with the new command . besid , you ’ re still a pretti big hero for go around twice over the bridg at ferrara . i guess you ’ re just about the biggest hero we ’ ve got now in the group . i just thought you ’ d like to know that they ’ ll onli be bluffing. ” “ thank , appleby. ” “ that ’ s the onli reason i start talk to you , to warn you. ” “ i appreci it. ” applebi scuf the toe of hi shoe into the ground sheepishli . “ i ’ m sorri we had that fist fight in the offic ’ club , yossarian. ” “ that ’ s all right. ” “ but i didn ’ t start it . i guess that wa orr ’ s fault for hit me in the face with hi ping-pong paddl . what ’ d he want to do that for ? ” “ you were beat him. ” “ wasn ’ t i suppos to beat him ? isn ’ t that the point ? now that he ’ s dead , i guess it doesn ’ t matter ani more whether i ’ m a better ping-pong player or not , doe it ? ” “ i guess not. ” “ and i ’ m sorri about make such a fuss about those atabrin tablet on the way over . if you want to catch malaria , i guess it ’ s your busi , isn ’ t it ? ” “ that ’ s all right , appleby. ” “ but i wa onli tri to do my duti . i wa obey order . i wa alway taught that i had to obey orders. ” “ that ’ s all right. ” “ you know , i said to colonel korn and colonel cathcart that i didn ’ t think they ought to make you fli ani more mission if you didn ’ t want to , and they said they were veri disappoint in me. ” yossarian smile with rueful amus . “ i ’ ll bet they are. ” “ well , i don ’ t care . hell , you ’ ve flown seventy-on . that ought to be enough . do you think they ’ ll let you get away with it ? ” “ no. ” “ say , if they do let you get away with it , they ’ ll have to let the rest of us get away with it , won ’ t they ? ” “ that ’ s whi they can ’ t let me get away with it. ” “ what do you think they ’ ll do ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ do you think they will tri to court-marti you ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ are you afraid ? ” “ yes. ” “ are you go to fli more mission ? ” “ no. ” “ i hope you do get away with it , ” applebi whisper with convict . “ i realli do. ” “ thank , appleby. ” “ i don ’ t feel too happi about fli so mani mission either now that it look as though we ’ ve got the war won . i ’ ll let you know if i hear anyth else. ” “ thank , appleby. ” “ hey ! ” call a mute , peremptori voic from the leafless shrub grow besid hi tent in a waist-high clump after applebi had gone . havermey wa hide there in a squat . he wa eat peanut brittl , and hi pimpl and larg , oili pore look like dark scale . “ how you do ? ” he ask when yossarian had walk to him . “ pretti good. ” “ are you go to fli more mission ? ” “ no. ” “ suppos they tri to make you ? ” “ i won ’ t let them. ” “ are you yellow ? ” “ yes. ” “ will they court-marti you ? ” “ they ’ ll probabl try. ” “ what did major major say ? ” “ major major ’ s gone. ” “ did they disappear him ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ what will you do if they decid to disappear you ? ” “ i ’ ll tri to stop them. ” “ didn ’ t they offer you ani deal or anyth if you did fli ? ” “ piltchard and wren said they ’ d arrang thing so i ’ d onli go on milk runs. ” havermey perk up . “ say , that sound like a pretti good deal . i wouldn ’ t mind a deal like that myself . i bet you snap it up. ” “ i turn it down. ” “ that wa dumb. ” havermey ’ s stolid , dull face furrow with constern . “ say , a deal like that wasn ’ t so fair to the rest of us , wa it ? if you onli flew on milk run , then some of us would have to fli your share of the danger mission , wouldn ’ t we ? ” “ that ’ s right. ” “ say , i don ’ t like that , ” havermey exclaim , rise resent with hi hand clench on hi hip . “ i don ’ t like that a bit . that ’ s a real royal screw they ’ re get readi to give me just becaus you ’ re too goddam yellow to fli ani more mission , isn ’ t it ? ” “ take it up with them , ” said yossarian and move hi hand to hi gun vigilantli . “ no , i ’ m not blame you , ” said havermey , “ even though i don ’ t like you . you know , i ’ m not too happi about fli so mani mission ani more either . isn ’ t there some way i can get out of it , too ? ” yossarian snicker iron and joke , “ put a gun on and start march with me. ” havermey shook hi head thought . “ nah , i couldn ’ t do that . i might bring some disgrac on my wife and kid if i act like a coward . nobodi like a coward . besid , i want to stay in the reserv when the war is over . you get five hundr dollar a year if you stay in the reserves. ” “ then fli more missions. ” “ yeah , i guess i have to . say , do you think there ’ s ani chanc they might take you off combat duti and send you home ? ” “ no. ” “ but if they do and let you take one person with you , will you pick me ? don ’ t pick anyon like applebi . pick me. ” “ whi in the world should they do someth like that ? ” “ i don ’ t know . but if they do , just rememb that i ask you first , will you ? and let me know how you ’ re do . i ’ ll wait for you here in these bush everi night . mayb if they don ’ t do anyth bad to you , i won ’ t fli ani more mission either . okay ? ” all the next even , peopl kept pop up at him out of the dark to ask him how he wa do , appeal to him for confidenti inform with weari , troubl face on the basi of some morbid and clandestin kinship he had not guess exist . peopl in the squadron he bare knew pop into sight out of nowher as he pass and ask him how he wa do . even men from other squadron came one by one to conceal themselv in the dark and pop out . everywher he step after sundown someon wa lie in wait to pop out and ask him how he wa do . peopl pop out at him from tree and bush , from ditch and tall weed , from around the corner of tent and from behind the fender of park car . even one of hi roommat pop out to ask him how he wa do and plead with him not to tell ani of hi other roommat he had pop out . yossarian drew near each beckon , overli cautiou silhouett with hi hand on hi gun , never know which hiss shadow would final turn dishonestli into nate ’ s whore or , wors , into some duli constitut government author sent to club him ruthlessli into insens . it began to look as if they would have to do someth like that . they did not want to court-marti him for desert in the face of the enemi becaus a hundr and thirty-f mile away from the enemi could hardli be call the face of the enemi , and becaus yossarian wa the one who had final knock down the bridg at ferrara by go around twice over the target and kill kraft-h wa alway almost forget kraft when he count the dead men he knew . but they had to do someth to him , and everyon wait grimli to see what horribl thing it would be . dure the day , they avoid him , even aarfi , and yossarian understood that they were differ peopl togeth in daylight than they were alon in the dark . he did not care about them at all as he walk about backward with hi hand on hi gun and await the latest blandish , threat and induc from group each time captain piltchard and wren drove back from anoth urgent confer with colonel cathcart and colonel korn . hungri joe wa hardli around , and the onli other person who ever spoke to him wa captain black , who call him “ old blood and gut ” in a merri , taunt voic each time he hail him and who came back from rome toward the end of the week to tell him nate ’ s whore wa gone . yossarian turn sorri with a stab of yearn and remors . he miss her . “ gone ? ” he echo in a hollow tone . “ yeah , gone. ” captain black laugh , hi bleari eye narrow with fatigu and hi peak , sharp face sprout as usual with a spars reddish-blond stubbl . he rub the bag under hi eye with both fist . “ i thought i might as well give the stupid broad anoth boff just for old time ’ sake as long as i wa in rome anyway . you know , just to keep that kid nate ’ s bodi spin in hi grave , ha , ha ! rememb the way i use to needl him ? but the place wa empty. ” “ wa there ani word from her ? ” prod yossarian , who had been brood incessantli about the girl , wonder how much she wa suffer , and feel almost lone and desert without her feroci and unappeas attack . “ there ’ s no one there , ” captain black exclaim cheer , tri to make yossarian understand . “ don ’ t you understand ? they ’ re all gone . the whole place is busted. ” “ gone ? ” “ yeah , gone . flush right out into the street. ” captain black chuckl heartili again , and hi point adam ’ s appl jump up and down with glee insid hi scraggli neck . “ the joint ’ s empti . the m.p. bust the whole apart up and drove the whore right out . ain ’ t that a laugh ? ” yossarian wa scare and began to trembl . “ whi ’ d they do that ? ” “ what differ doe it make ? respond captain black with an exuber gestur . “ they flush them right out into the street . how do you like that ? the whole batch. ” “ what about the kid sister ? ” “ flush away , ” laugh captain black . “ flush away with the rest of the broad . right out into the street. ” “ but she ’ s onli a kid ! ” yossarian object passion . “ she doesn ’ t know anybodi els in the whole citi . what ’ s go to happen to her ? ” “ what the hell do i care ? ” respond captain black with an indiffer shrug , and then gawk suddenli at yossarian with surpris and with a crafti gleam of pri elat . “ say , what ’ s the matter ? if i knew thi wa go to make you so unhappi , i would have come right over and told you , just to make you eat your liver . hey , where are you go ? come on back ! come on back here and eat your liver ! ” 39 the etern citi yossarian wa go absent without offici leav with milo , who , as the plane cruis toward rome , shook hi head reproach and , with piou lip puls , inform yossarian in ecclesiast tone that he wa asham of him . yossarian nod . yossarian wa make an uncouth spectacl of himself by walk around backward with hi gun on hi hip and refus to fli more combat mission , milo said . yossarian nod . it wa disloy to hi squadron and embarrass to hi superior . he wa place milo in a veri uncomfort posit , too . yossarian nod again . the men were start to grumbl . it wa not fair for yossarian to think onli of hi own safeti while men like milo , colonel cathcart , colonel korn and ex-p.f.c . wintergreen were will to do everyth they could to win the war . the men with seventi mission were star to grumbl becaus they had to fli eighti , and there wa a danger some of them might put on gun and begin walk around backward , too . moral wa deterior and it wa all yossarian ’ s fault . the countri wa in peril ; he wa jeopard hi tradit right of freedom and independ by dare to exercis them . yossarian kept nod in the co-pilot ’ s seat and tri not to listen as milo prattl on . nate ’ s whore wa on hi mind , as were kraft and orr and nate and dunbar , and kid sampson and mcwatt , and all the poor and stupid and diseas peopl he had seen in itali , egypt and north africa and knew about in other area of the world , and snowden and nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister were on hi conscienc , too . yossarian thought he knew whi nate ’ s whore held him respons for nate ’ s death and want to kill him . whi the hell shouldn ’ t she ? it wa a man ’ s world , and she and everyon younger had everi right to blame him and everyon older for everi unnatur tragedi that befel them ; just as she , even in her grief , wa to blame for everi man-mad miseri that land on her kid sister and on all other children behind her . someon had to do someth sometim . everi victim wa a culprit , everi culprit a victim , and somebodi had to stand up sometim to tri to break the lousi chain of inherit habit that wa imperil them all . in part of africa littl boy were still stolen away by adult slave trader and sold for money to men who disembowel them and ate them . yossarian marvel that children could suffer such barbar sacrific without evinc the slightest hint of fear or pain . he took it for grant that they did submit so stoical . if not , he reason , the custom would certainli have die , for no crave for wealth or immort could be so great , he felt , as to subsist on the sorrow of children . he wa rock the boat , milo said , and yossarian nod onc more . he wa not a good member of the team , milo said . yossarian nod and listen to milo tell him that the decent thing to do if he did not like the way colonel cathcart and colonel korn were run the group wa go to russia , instead of stir up troubl . colonel cathcart and colonel korn had both been veri good to yossarian , milo said ; hadn ’ t they given him a medal after the last mission to ferrara and promot him to captain ? yossarian nod . didn ’ t they feed him and give him hi pay everi month ? yossarian nod again . milo wa sure they would be charit if he went to them to apolog and recant and promis to fli eighti mission . yossarian said he would think it over , and held hi breath and pray for a safe land as milo drop hi wheel and glide in toward the runway . it wa funni how he had realli come to detest fli . rome wa in ruin , he saw , when the plane wa down . the airdrom had been bomb eight month befor , and knobbi slab of white stone rubbl had been bulldoz into flat-top heap on both side of the entranc through the wire fenc surround the field . the colosseum wa a dilapid shell , and the arch of constantin had fallen . nate ’ s whore ’ s apart wa a shambl . the girl were gone , and the onli one there wa the old woman . the window in the apart had been smash . she wa bundl up in sweater and skirt and wore a dark shawl about her head . she sat on a wooden chair near an electr hot plate , her arm fold , boil water in a batter aluminum pot . she wa talk aloud to herself when yossarian enter and began moan as soon as she saw him . “ gone , ” she moan befor he could even inquir . hold her elbow , she rock back and forth mourn on her creak chair . “ gone. ” “ who ? ” “ all . all the poor young girls. ” “ where ? ” “ away . chase away into the street . all of them gone . all the poor young girls. ” “ chase away by who ? who did it ? ” “ the mean tall soldier with the hard white hat and club . and by our carabinieri . they came with their club and chase them away . they would not even let them take their coat . the poor thing . they just chase them away into the cold. ” “ did they arrest them ? ” “ they chase them away . they just chase them away. ” “ then whi did they do it if they didn ’ t arrest them ? ” “ i don ’ t know , ” sob the old woman . “ i don ’ t know . who will take care of me ? who will take care of me now that all the poor young girl are gone ? who will take care of me ? ” “ there must have been a reason , ” yossarian persist , pound hi fist into hi hand . “ they couldn ’ t just barg in here and chase everyon out. ” “ no reason , ” wail the old woman . “ no reason. ” “ what right did they have ? ” “ catch-22. ” “ what ? ” yossarian froze in hi track with fear and alarm and felt hi whole bodi begin to tingl . “ what did you say ? ” “ catch-22 ” the old woman repeat , rock her head up and down . “ catch-22 . catch-22 say they have a right to do anyth we can ’ t stop them from doing. ” “ what the hell are you talk about ? ” yossarian shout at her in bewild , furiou protest . “ how did you know it wa catch-22 ? who the hell told you it wa catch-22 ? ” “ the soldier with the hard white hat and club . the girl were cri . ‘ did we do anyth wrong ? ’ they said . the men said no and push them away out the door with the end of their club . ‘ then whi are you chase us out ? ’ the girl said . ‘ catch-22 , ’ the men said . ‘ what right do you have ? ’ the girl said . ‘ catch-22 , ’ the men said . all they kept say wa ‘ catch-22 , catch-22. ’ what doe it mean , catch-22 ? what is catch-22 ? ” “ didn ’ t they show it to you ? ” yossarian demand , stamp about in anger and distress . “ didn ’ t you even make them read it ? ” “ they don ’ t have to show us catch-22 , ” the old woman answer . “ the law say they don ’ t have to. ” “ what law say they don ’ t have to ? ” “ catch-22. ” “ oh , god damn ! ” yossarian exclaim bitterli . “ i bet it wasn ’ t even realli there. ” he stop walk and glanc about the room disconsol . “ where ’ s the old man ? ” “ gone , ” mourn the old woman . “ gone ? ” “ dead , ” the old woman told him , nod in emphat lament , point to her head with the flat of her hand . “ someth broke in here . one minut he wa live , one minut he wa dead. ” “ but he can ’ t be dead ! ” yossarian cri , readi to argu insist . but of cours he knew it wa true , knew it wa logic and true ; onc again the old man had march along with the major . yossarian turn away and trudg through the apart with a gloomi scowl , peer with pessimist curios into all the room . everyth made of glass had been smash by the men with the club . torn drape and bed lay dump on the floor . chair , tabl and dresser had been overturn . everyth breakabl had been broken . the destruct wa total . no wild vandal could have been more thorough . everi window wa smash , and dark pour like inki cloud into each room through the shatter pane . yossarian could imagin the heavi , crash footfal of the tall m.p. in the hard white hat . he could pictur the fieri and malici exhilar with which they had made their wreckag , and their sanctimoni , ruthless sens of right and dedic . all the poor young girl were gone . everyon wa gone but the weep old woman in the bulki brown and gray sweater and black head shawl , and soon she too would be gone . “ gone , ” she griev , when he walk back in , befor he could even speak . “ who will take care of me now ? ” yossarian ignor the question . “ nate ’ s girl friend-did anyon hear from her ? ” he ask . “ gone. ” “ i know she ’ s gone . but did anyon hear from her ? doe anyon know where she is ? ” “ gone. ” “ the littl sister . what happen to her ? ” “ gone. ” the old woman ’ s tone had not chang . “ do you know what i ’ m talk about ? ” yossarian ask sharpli , stare into her eye to see if she were not speak to him from a coma . he rais hi voic . “ what happen to the kid sister , to the littl girl ? ” “ gone , gone , ” the old woman repli with a crabbi shrug , irrit by hi persist , her low wail grow louder . “ chase away with the rest , chase away into the street . they would not even let her take her coat. ” “ where did she go ? ” “ i don ’ t know . i don ’ t know. ” “ who will take care of her ? ” “ who will take care of me ? ” “ she doesn ’ t know anybodi els , doe she ? ” “ who will take care of me ? ” yossarian left money in the old woman ’ s lap-it wa odd how mani wrong leav money seem to right-and strode out of the apart , curs catch-22 vehement as he descend the stair , even though he knew there wa no such thing . catch-22 did not exist , he wa posit of that , but it made no differ . what did matter wa that everyon thought it exist , and that wa much wors , for there wa no object or text to ridicul or refut , to accus , critic , attack , amend , hate , revil , spit at , rip to shred , trampl upon or burn up . it wa cold outsid , and dark , and a leaki , insipid mist lay swollen in the air and trickl down the larg , unpolish stone block of the hous and the pedest of monument . yossarian hurri back to milo and recant . he said he wa sorri and , know he wa lie , promis to fli as mani more mission as colonel cathcart want if milo would onli use all hi influenc in rome to help him locat nate ’ s whore ’ s kid sister . “ she ’ s just a twelve-year-old virgin , milo , ” he explain anxious , “ and i want to find her befor it ’ s too late. ” milo respond to hi request with a benign smile . “ i ’ ve got just the twelve-year-old virgin you ’ re look for , ” he announc jubilantli . “ thi twelve-year-old virgin is realli onli thirty-four , but she wa brought up on a low-protein diet by veri strict parent and didn ’ t start sleep with men until- “ “ milo , i ’ m talk about a littl girl ! ” yossarian interrupt him with desper impati . “ don ’ t you understand ? i don ’ t want to sleep with her . i want to help her . you ’ ve got daughter . she ’ s just a littl kid , and she ’ s all alon in thi citi with no one to take care of her . i want to protect her from harm . don ’ t you know what i ’ m talk about ? ” milo did understand and wa deepli touch . “ yossarian , i ’ m proud of you , ” he exclaim with profound emot . “ i realli am . you don ’ t know how glad i am to see that everyth isn ’ t alway just sex with you . you ’ ve got principl . certainli i ’ ve got daughter , and i know exactli what you ’ re talk about . we ’ ll find that girl if we have to turn thi whole citi upsid down . come along. ” yossarian went along in milo minderbind ’ s speed m amp ; m staff car to polic headquart to meet a swarthi , untidi polic commission with a narrow black mustach and unbutton tunic who wa fiddl with a stout woman with wart and two chin when they enter hi offic and who greet milo with warm surpris and bow and scrape in obscen servil as though milo were some eleg marqui . “ ah , marches milo , ” he declar with effus pleasur , push the fat , disgruntl woman out the door without even look toward her . “ whi didn ’ t you tell me you were come ? i would have a big parti for you . come in , come in , marches . you almost never visit us ani more. ” milo knew that there wa not one moment to wast . “ hello , luigi , ” he said , nod so briskli that he almost seem rude . “ luigi , i need your help . my friend here want to find a girl. ” “ a girl , marches ? ” said luigi , scratch hi face pensiv . “ there are lot of girl in rome . for an american offic , a girl should not be too difficult. ” “ no , luigi , you don ’ t understand . thi is a twelve-year-old virgin that he ha to find right away. ” “ ah , ye , now i understand , ” luigi said sagaci . “ a virgin might take a littl time . but if he wait at the bu termin where the young farm girl look for work arriv , i- “ “ luigi , you still don ’ t understand , ” milo snap with such brusqu impati that the polic commission ’ s face flush and he jump to attent and began button hi uniform in confus . “ thi girl is a friend , an old friend of the famili , and we want to help her . she ’ s onli a child . she ’ s all alon in thi citi somewher , and we have to find her befor somebodi harm her . now do you understand ? luigi , thi is veri import to me . i have a daughter the same age as that littl girl , and noth in the world mean more to me right now than save that poor child befor it ’ s too late . will you help ? ” “ si , marches , now i understand , ” said luigi . “ and i will do everyth in my power to find her . but tonight i have almost no men . tonight all my men are busi tri to break up the traffic in illeg tobacco. ” “ illeg tobacco ? ” ask milo . “ milo , ” yossarian bleat faintli with a sink heart , sens at onc that all wa lost . “ si , marches , ” said luigi . “ the profit in illeg tobacco is so high that the smuggl is almost imposs to control. ” “ is there realli that much profit in illeg tobacco ? ” milo inquir with keen interest , hi rust-color eyebrow arch avidli and hi nostril snif . “ milo , ” yossarian call to him . “ pay attent to me , will you ? ” “ si , marches , ” luigi answer . “ the profit in illeg tobacco is veri high . the smuggl is a nation scandal , marches , truli a nation disgrace. ” “ is that a fact ? ” milo observ with a preoccupi smile and start toward the door as though in a spell . “ milo ! ” yossarian yell , and bound forward impuls to intercept him . “ milo , you ’ ve got to help me. ” “ illeg tobacco , ” milo explain to him with a look of epilept lust , struggl doggedli to get by . “ let me go . i ’ ve got to smuggl illeg tobacco. ” “ stay here and help me find her , ” plead yossarian . “ you can smuggl illeg tobacco tomorrow. ” but milo wa deaf and kept push forward , nonviol but irresist , sweat , hi eye , as though he were in the grip of a blind fixat , burn feverishli , and hi twitch mouth slaver . he moan calmli as though in remot , instinct distress and kept repeat , “ illeg tobacco , illeg tobacco. ” yossarian step out of the way with resign final when he saw it wa hopeless to tri to reason with him . milo wa gone like a shot . the commission of polic unbutton hi tunic again and look at yossarian with contempt . “ what do you want here ? ” he ask coldli . “ do you want me to arrest you ? ” yossarian walk out of the offic and down the stair into the dark , tomblik street , pass in the hall the stout woman with wart and two chin , who wa alreadi on her way back in . there wa no sign of milo outsid . there were no light in ani of the window . the desert sidewalk rose steepli and continu for sever block . he could see the glare of a broad avenu at the top of the long cobbleston inclin . the polic station wa almost at the bottom ; the yellow bulb at the entranc sizzl in the damp like wet torch . a frigid , fine rain wa fall . he began walk slowli , push uphil . soon he came to a quiet , cozi , invit restaur with red velvet drape in the window and a blue neon sign near the door that said : toni ’ s restaur fine food and drink . keep out . the word on the blue neon sign surpris him mildli for onli an instant . noth warp seem bizarr ani more in hi strang , distort surround . the top of the sheer build slant in weird , surrealist perspect , and the street seem tilt . he rais the collar of hi warm woolen coat and hug it around him . the night wa raw . a boy in a thin shirt and thin tatter trouser walk out of the dark on bare feet . the boy had black hair and need a haircut and shoe and sock . hi sickli face wa pale and sad . hi feet made grisli , soft , suck sound in the rain puddl on the wet pavement as he pass , and yossarian wa move by such intens piti for hi poverti that he want to smash hi pale , sad , sickli face with hi fist and knock him out of exist becaus he brought to mind all the pale , sad , sickli children in itali that same night who need haircut and need shoe and sock . he made yossarian think of crippl and of cold and hungri men and women , and of all the dumb , passiv , devout mother with cataton eye nurs infant outdoor that same night with chill anim udder bare insens to that same raw rain . cow . almost on cue , a nurs mother pad past hold an infant in black rag , and yossarian want to smash her too , becaus she remind him of the barefoot boy in the thin shirt and thin , tatter trouser and of all the shiver , stupefi miseri in a world that never yet had provid enough heat and food and justic for all but an ingeni and unscrupul hand . what a lousi earth ! he wonder how mani peopl were destitut that same night even in hi own prosper countri , how mani home were shanti , how mani husband were drunk and wive sock , and how mani children were bulli , abus or abandon . how mani famili hunger for food they could not afford to buy ? how mani heart were broken ? how mani suicid would take place that same night , how mani peopl would go insan ? how mani cockroach and landlord would triumph ? how mani winner were loser , success failur , rich men poor men ? how mani wise guy were stupid ? how mani happi end were unhappi end ? how mani honest men were liar , brave men coward , loyal men traitor , how mani saint men were corrupt , how mani peopl in posit of trust had sold their soul to blackguard for petti cash , how mani had never had soul ? how mani straight-and-narrow path were crook path ? how mani best famili were worst famili and how mani good peopl were bad peopl ? when you ad them all up and then subtract , you might be left with onli the children , and perhap with albert einstein and an old violinist or sculptor somewher . yossarian walk in lone tortur , feel estrang , and could not wipe from hi mind the excruci imag of the barefoot boy with sickli cheek until he turn the corner into the avenu final and came upon an alli soldier have convuls on the ground , a young lieuten with a small , pale , boyish face . six other soldier from differ countri wrestl with differ part of him , strive to help him and hold him still . he yelp and groan unintellig through clench teeth , hi eye roll up into hi head . “ don ’ t let him bite hi tongu off , ” a short sergeant near yossarian advis shrewdli , and a seventh man threw himself into the fray to wrestl with the ill lieuten ’ s face . all at onc the wrestler won and turn to each other undecidedli , for now that they held the young lieuten rigid they did not know what to do with him . a quiver of moron panic spread from one strain brute face to anoth . “ whi don ’ t you lift him up and put him on the hood of that car ? ” a corpor stand in back of yossarian drawl . that seem to make sens , so the seven men lift the young lieuten up and stretch him out care on the hood of a park car , still pin each struggl part of him down . onc they had him stretch out on the hood of the park car , they stare at each other uneasili again , for they had no idea what to do with him next . “ whi don ’ t you lift him up off the hood of that car and lay him down on the ground ? ” drawl the same corpor behind yossarian . that seem like a good idea , too , and they began to move him back to the sidewalk , but befor they could finish , a jeep race up with a flash red spotlight at the side and two militari policemen in the front seat . “ what ’ s go on ? ” the driver yell . “ he ’ s have convuls , ” one of the men grappl with one of the young lieuten ’ s limb answer . “ we ’ re hold him still. ” “ that ’ s good . he ’ s under arrest. ” “ what should we do with him ? ” “ keep him under arrest ! ” the m.p . shout , doubl over with raucou laughter at hi jest , and sped away in hi jeep . yossarian recal that he had no leav paper and move prudent past the strang group toward the sound of muffl voic eman from a distanc insid the murki dark ahead . the broad , rain-blotch boulevard wa illumin everi half-block by short , curl lamppost with eeri , shimmer glare surround by smoki brown mist . from a window overhead he heard an unhappi femal voic plead , “ pleas don ’ t . pleas don ’ t. ” a despond young woman in a black raincoat with much black hair on her face pass with her eye lower . at the ministri of public affair on the next block , a drunken ladi wa back up against one of the flute corinthian column by a drunken young soldier , while three drunken comrad in arm sat watch nearbi on the step with wine bottl stand between their leg . “ pleesh don ’ t , ” beg the drunken ladi . “ i want to go home now . pleesh don ’ t. ” one of the sit men curs pugnaci and hurl a wine bottl at yossarian when he turn to look up . the bottl shatter harmlessli far away with a brief and mute nois . yossarian continu walk away at the same listless , unhurri pace , hand buri in hi pocket . “ come on , babi , ” he heard the drunken soldier urg determinedli . “ it ’ s my turn now. ” “ pleesh don ’ t , ” beg the drunken ladi . “ pleesh don ’ t. ” at the veri next corner , deep insid the dens , impenetr shadow of a narrow , wind side street , he heard the mysteri , unmistak sound of someon shovel snow . the measur , labor , evoc scrape of iron shovel against concret made hi flesh crawl with terror as he step from the curb to cross the omin alley and hurri onward until the haunt , incongru nois had been left behind . now he knew where he wa : soon , if he continu without turn , he would come to the dri fountain in the middl of the boulevard , then to the offic ’ apart seven block beyond . he heard snarl , inhuman voic cut through the ghostli black in front suddenli . the bulb on the corner lamp post had die , spill gloom over half the street , throw everyth visibl off balanc . on the other side of the intersect , a man wa beat a dog with a stick like the man who wa beat the hors with a whip in raskolnikov ’ s dream . yossarian strain helplessli not to see or hear . the dog whimper and squeal in brute , dumbfound hysteria at the end of an old manila rope and grovel and crawl on it belli without resist , but the man beat it and beat it anyway with hi heavi , flat stick . a small crowd watch . a squat woman step out and ask him pleas to stop . “ mind your own busi , ” the man bark gruffli , lift hi stick as though he might beat her too , and the woman retreat sheepishli with an abject and humili air . yossarian quicken hi pace to get away , almost ran . the night wa fill with horror , and he thought he knew how christ must have felt as he walk through the world , like a psychiatrist through a ward full of nut , like a victim through a prison full of thiev . what a welcom sight a leper must have been ! at the next corner a man wa beat a small boy brutal in the midst of an immobil crowd of adult spectat who made no effort to interven . yossarian recoil with sicken recognit . he wa certain he had wit that same horribl scene sometim befor . déjà vu ? the sinist coincid shook him and fill him with doubt and dread . it wa the same scene he had wit a block befor , although everyth in it seem quit differ . what in the world wa happen ? would a squat woman step out and ask the man to pleas stop ? would he rais hi hand to strike her and would she retreat ? nobodi move . the child cri steadili as though in drug miseri . the man kept knock him down with hard , resound open-palm blow to the head , then jerk him up to hi feet in order to knock him down again . no one in the sullen , cower crowd seem to care enough about the stun and beaten boy to interfer . the child wa no more than nine . one drab woman wa weep silent into a dirti dish towel . the boy wa emaci and need a haircut . bright-r blood wa stream from both ear . yossarian cross quickli to the other side of the immens avenu to escap the nauseat sight and found himself walk on human teeth lie on the drench , glisten pavement near splotch of blood kept sticki by the pelt raindrop poke each one like sharp fingernail . molar and broken incisor lay scatter everywher . he circl on tipto the grotesqu debri and came near a doorway contain a cri soldier hold a satur handkerchief to hi mouth , support as he sag by two other soldier wait in grave impati for the militari ambul that final came clang up with amber fog light on and pass them by for an alterc on the next block between a civilian italian with book and a slew of civilian policemen with armlock and club . the scream , struggl civilian wa a dark man with a face white as flour from fear . hi eye were pulsat in hectic desper , flap like bat ’ s wing , as the mani tall policemen seiz him by the arm and leg and lift him up . hi book were spill on the ground . “ help ! ” he shriek shrilli in a voic strangl in it own emot , as the policemen carri him to the open door in the rear of the ambul and threw him insid . “ polic ! help ! polic ! ” the door were shut and bolt , and the ambul race away . there wa a humorless ironi in the ludicr panic of the man scream for help to the polic while policemen were all around him . yossarian smile wryli at the futil and ridicul cri for aid , then saw with a start that the word were ambigu , realiz with alarm that they were not , perhap , intend as a call for polic but as a heroic warn from the grave by a doom friend to everyon who wa not a policeman with a club and a gun and a mob of other policemen with club and gun to back him up . “ help ! polic ! ” the man had cri , and he could have been shout of danger . yossarian respond to the thought by slip away stealthili from the polic and almost trip over the feet of a burli woman of forti hasten across the intersect guiltili , dart furtiv , vindict glanc behind her toward a woman of eighti with thick , bandag ankl dodder after her in a lose pursuit . the old woman wa gasp for breath as she minc along and mutter to herself in distract agit . there wa no mistak the natur of the scene ; it wa a chase . the triumphant first woman wa halfway across the wide avenu befor the second woman reach the curb . the nasti , small , gloat smile with which she glanc back at the labor old woman wa both wick and apprehens . yossarian knew he could help the troubl old woman if she would onli cri out , knew he could spring forward and captur the sturdi first woman and hold her for the mob of policemen nearbi if the second woman would onli give him licens with a shriek of distress . but the old woman pass by without even see him , mumbl in terribl , tragic vexat , and soon the first woman had vanish into the deepen layer of dark and the old woman wa left stand helplessli in the center of the thoroughfar , daze , uncertain which way to proceed , alon . yossarian tore hi eye from her and hurri away in shame becaus he had done noth to assist her . he dart furtiv , guilti glanc back as he fled in defeat , afraid the old woman might now start follow him , and he welcom the conceal shelter of the drizzl , drift , lightless , nearli opaqu gloom . mobs… mob of policemen-everyth but england wa in the hand of mob , mob , mob . mob with club were in control everywher . the surfac of the collar and shoulder of yossarian ’ s coat wa soak . hi sock were wet and cold . the light on the next lamppost wa out , too , the glass globe broken . build and featureless shape flow by him noiselessli as though born past immut on the surfac of some rank and timeless tide . a tall monk pass , hi face buri entir insid a coars gray cowl , even the eye hidden . footstep slosh toward him steadili through a puddl , and he fear it would be anoth barefoot child . he brush by a gaunt , cadaver , trist man in a black raincoat with a star-shap scar in hi cheek and a glossi mutil depress the size of an egg in one templ . on squish straw sandal , a young woman materi with her whole face disfigur by a god-aw pink and piebald burn that start on her neck and stretch in a raw , corrug mass up both cheek past her eye ! yossarian could not bear to look , and shudder . no one would ever love her . hi spirit wa sick ; he long to lie down with some girl he could love who would sooth and excit him and put him to sleep . a mob with a club wa wait for him in pianosa . the girl were all gone . the countess and her daughter-in-law were no longer good enough ; he had grown too old for fun , he no longer had the time . luciana wa gone , dead , probabl ; if not yet , then soon enough . aarfi ’ s buxom trollop had vanish with her smutti cameo ring , and nurs duckett wa asham of him becaus he had refus to fli more combat mission and would caus a scandal . the onli girl he knew nearbi wa the plain maid in the offic ’ apart , whom none of the men had ever slept with . her name wa michaela , but the men call her filthi thing in dulcet , ingrati voic , and she giggl with childish joy becaus she understood no english and thought they were flatter her and make harmless joke . everyth wild she watch them do fill her with enchant delight . she wa a happi , simple-mind , hard-work girl who could not read and wa bare abl to write her name . her straight hair wa the color of rot straw . she had sallow skin and myopic eye , and none of the men had ever slept with her becaus none of the men had ever want to , none but aarfi , who had rape her onc that same even and had then held her prison in a cloth closet for almost two hour with hi hand over her mouth until the civilian curfew siren sound and it wa unlaw for her to be outsid . then he threw her out the window . her dead bodi wa still lie on the pavement when yossarian arriv and push hi way polit through the circl of solemn neighbor with dim lantern , who glare with venom as they shrank away from him and point up bitterli toward the second-floor window in their privat , grim , accus convers . yossarian ’ s heart pound with fright and horror at the piti , omin , gori spectacl of the broken corps . he duck into the hallway and bolt up the stair into the apart , where he found aarfi pace about uneasili with a pompou , slightli uncomfort smile . aarfi seem a bit unsettl as he fidget with hi pipe and assur yossarian that everyth wa go to be all right . there wa noth to worri about . “ i onli rape her onc , ” he explain . yossarian wa aghast . “ but you kill her , aarfi ! you kill her ! ” “ oh , i had to do that after i rape her , ” aarfi repli in hi most condescend manner . “ i couldn ’ t veri well let her go around say bad thing about us , could i ? ” “ but whi did you have to touch her at all , you dumb bastard ? ” yossarian shout . “ whi couldn ’ t you get yourself a girl off the street if you want one ? the citi is full of prostitutes. ” “ oh , no , not me , ” aarfi brag . “ i never paid for it in my life. ” “ aarfi , are you insan ? ” yossarian wa almost speechless . “ you kill a girl . they ’ re go to put you in jail ! ” “ oh , no , ” aarfi answer with a forc smile . “ not me . they aren ’ t go to put good old aarfi in jail . not for kill her. ” “ but you threw her out the window . she ’ s lie dead in the street. ” “ she ha no right to be there , ” aarfi answer . “ it ’ s after curfew. ” “ stupid ! don ’ t you realiz what you ’ ve done ? ” yossarian want to grab aarfi by hi well-f , caterpillar-soft shoulder and shake some sens into him . “ you ’ ve murder a human be . they are go to put you in jail . they might even hang you ! ” “ oh , i hardli think they ’ ll do that , ” aarfi repli with a jovial chuckl , although hi symptom of nervous increas . he spill tobacco crumb unconsci as hi short finger fumbl with the bowl of hi pipe . “ no , sirre . not to good old aarfy. ” he chortl again . “ she wa onli a servant girl . i hardli think they ’ re go to make too much of a fuss over one poor italian servant girl when so mani thousand of live are be lost everi day . do you ? ” “ listen ! ” yossarian cri , almost in joy . he prick up hi ear and watch the blood drain from aarfi ’ s face as siren mourn far away , polic siren , and then ascend almost instantan to a howl , strident , onrush cacophoni of overwhelm sound that seem to crash into the room around them from everi side . “ aarfi , they ’ re come for you , ” he said in a flood of compass , shout to be heard abov the nois . “ they ’ re come to arrest you . aarfi , don ’ t you understand ? you can ’ t take the life of anoth human be and get away with it , even if she is just a poor servant girl . don ’ t you see ? can ’ t you understand ? ” “ oh , no , ” aarfi insist with a lame laugh and a weak smile . “ they ’ re not come to arrest me . not good old aarfy. ” all at onc he look sick . he sank down on a chair in a trembl stupor , hi stumpi , lax hand quak in hi lap . car skid to a stop outsid . spotlight hit the window immedi . car door slam and polic whistl screech . voic rose harshli . aarfi wa green . he kept shake hi head mechan with a queer , numb smile and repeat in a weak , hollow monoton that they were not come for him , not for good old aarfi , no sirre , strive to convinc himself that thi wa so even as heavi footstep race up the stair and pound across the land , even as fist beat on the door four time with a deafen , inexor forc . then the door to the apart flew open , and two larg , tough , brawni m.p. with ici eye and firm , sinewi , unsmil jaw enter quickli , strode across the room , and arrest yossarian . they arrest yossarian for be in rome without a pass . they apolog to aarfi for intrud and led yossarian away between them , grip him under each arm with finger as hard as steel manacl . they said noth at all to him on the way down . two more tall m.p. with club and hard white helmet were wait outsid at a close car . they march yossarian into the back seat , and the car roar away and weav through the rain and muddi fog to a polic station . the m.p. lock him up for the night in a cell with four stone wall . at dawn they gave him a pail for a latrin and drove him to the airport , where two more giant m.p. with club and white helmet were wait at a transport plane whose engin were alreadi warm up when they arriv , the cylindr green cowl ooz quiver bead of condens . none of the m.p. said anyth to each other either . they did not even nod . yossarian had never seen such granit face . the plane flew to pianosa . two more silent m.p. were wait at the land strip . there were now eight , and they file with precis , wordless disciplin into two car and sped on hum tire past the four squadron area to the group headquart build , where still two more m.p. were wait at the park area . all ten tall , strong , purpos , silent men tower around him as they turn toward the entranc . their footstep crunch in loud unison on the cinder ground . he had an impress of acceler hast . he wa terrifi . everi one of the ten m.p. seem power enough to bash him to death with a singl blow . they had onli to press their massiv , toughen , boulder shoulder against him to crush all life from hi bodi . there wa noth he could do to save himself . he could not even see which two were grip him under the arm as they march him rapidli between the two tight single-fil column they had form . their pace quicken , and he felt as though he were fli along with hi feet off the ground as they trot in resolut cadenc up the wide marbl staircas to the upper land , where still two more inscrut militari policemen with hard face were wait to lead them all at an even faster pace down the long , cantilev balconi overhang the immens lobbi . their march footstep on the dull tile floor thunder like an awesom , quicken drum roll through the vacant center of the build as they move with even greater speed and precis toward colonel cathcart ’ s offic , and violent wind of panic began blow in yossarian ’ s ear when they turn him toward hi doom insid the offic , where colonel korn , hi rump spread comfort on a corner of colonel cathcart ’ s desk , sat wait to greet him with a genial smile and said , “ we ’ re send you home. ” 40 catch-22 there wa , of cours , a catch . “ catch-22 ? ” inquir yossarian . “ of cours , ” colonel korn answer pleasantli , after he had chase the mighti guard of massiv m.p. out with an insouci flick of hi hand and a slightli contemptu nod-most relax , as alway , when he could be most cynic . hi rimless squar eyeglass glint with sli amus as he gaze at yossarian . “ after all , we can ’ t simpli send you home for refus to fli more mission and keep the rest of the men here , can we ? that would hardli be fair to them. ” “ you ’ re goddam right ! ” colonel cathcart blurt out , lumber back and forth gracelessli like a wind bull , puf and pout angrili . “ i ’ d like to tie him up hand and foot and throw him aboard a plane on everi mission . that ’ s what i ’ d like to do. ” colonel korn motion colonel cathcart to be silent and smile at yossarian . “ you know , you realli have been make thing terribl difficult for colonel cathcart , ” he observ with flip good humor , as though the fact did not displeas him at all . “ the men are unhappi and moral is begin to deterior . and it ’ s all your fault. ” “ it ’ s your fault , ” yossarian argu , “ for rais the number of missions. ” “ no , it ’ s your fault for refus to fli them , ” colonel korn retort . “ the men were perfectli content to fli as mani mission as we ask as long as they thought they had no altern . now you ’ ve given them hope , and they ’ re unhappi . so the blame is all yours. ” “ doesn ’ t he know there ’ s a war go on ? ” colonel cathcart , still stamp back and forth , demand moros without look at yossarian . “ i ’ m quit sure he doe , ” colonel korn answer . “ that ’ s probabl whi he refus to fli them. ” “ doesn ’ t it make ani differ to him ? ” “ will the knowledg that there ’ s a war go on weaken your decis to refus to particip in it ? ” colonel korn inquir with sarcast serious , mock colonel cathcart . “ no , sir , ” yossarian repli , almost return colonel korn ’ s smile . “ i wa afraid of that , ” colonel korn remark with an elabor sigh , lock hi finger togeth comfort on top of hi smooth , bald , broad , shini brown head . “ you know , in all fair , we realli haven ’ t treat you too badli , have we ? we ’ ve fed you and paid you on time . we gave you a medal and even made you a captain. ” “ i never should have made him a captain , ” colonel cathcart exclaim bitterli . “ i should have given him a court-marti after he lous up that ferrara mission and went around twice. ” “ i told you not to promot him , ” said colonel korn , “ but you wouldn ’ t listen to me. ” “ no you didn ’ t . you told me to promot him , didn ’ t you ? ” “ i told you not to promot him . but you just wouldn ’ t listen. ” “ i should have listened. ” “ you never listen to me , ” colonel korn persist with relish . “ that ’ s the reason we ’ re in thi spot. ” “ all right , gee whiz . stop rub it in , will you ? ” colonel cathcart burrow hi fist down deep insid hi pocket and turn away in a slouch . “ instead of pick on me , whi don ’ t you figur out what we ’ re go to do about him ? ” “ we ’ re go to send him home , i ’ m afraid. ” colonel korn wa chuckl triumphantli when he turn away from colonel cathcart to face yossarian . “ yossarian , the war is over for you . we ’ re go to send you home . you realli don ’ t deserv it , you know , which is one of the reason i don ’ t mind do it . sinc there ’ s noth els we can risk do to you at thi time , we ’ ve decid to return you to the state . we ’ ve work out thi littl deal to- “ “ what kind of deal ? ” yossarian demand with defiant mistrust . colonel korn toss hi head back and laugh . “ oh , a thoroughli despic deal , make no mistak about that . it ’ s absolut revolt . but you ’ ll accept it quickli enough. ” “ don ’ t be too sure. ” “ i haven ’ t the slightest doubt you will , even though it stink to high heaven . oh , by the way . you haven ’ t told ani of the men you ’ ve refus to fli more mission , have you ? ” “ no , sir , ” yossarian answer promptli . colonel korn nod approvingli . “ that ’ s good . i like the way you lie . you ’ ll go far in thi world if you ever acquir some decent ambition. ” “ doesn ’ t he know there ’ s a war go on ? ” colonel cathcart yell out suddenli , and blew with vigor disbelief into the open end of hi cigarett holder . “ i ’ m quit sure he doe , ” colonel korn repli acidli , “ sinc you brought that ident point to hi attent just a moment ago. ” colonel korn frown wearili for yossarian ’ s benefit , hi eye twinkl swarthili with sli and dare scorn . grip the edg of colonel cathcart ’ s desk with both hand , he lift hi flaccid haunch far back on the corner to sit with both short leg dangl freeli . hi shoe kick lightli against the yellow oak wood , hi sludge-brown sock , garterless , collaps in sag circl below ankl that were surprisingli small and white . “ you know , yossarian , ” he muse affabl in a manner of casual reflect that seem both deris and sincer , “ i realli do admir you a bit . you ’ re an intellig person of great moral charact who ha taken a veri courag stand . i ’ m an intellig person with no moral charact at all , so i ’ m in an ideal posit to appreci it. ” “ these are veri critic time , ” colonel cathcart assert petulantli from a far corner of the offic , pay no attent to colonel korn . “ veri critic time inde , ” colonel korn agre with a placid nod . “ we ’ ve just had a chang of command abov , and we can ’ t afford a situat that might put us in a bad light with either gener scheisskopf or gener peckem . isn ’ t that what you mean , colonel ? ” “ hasn ’ t he got ani patriot ? ” “ won ’ t you fight for your countri ? ” colonel korn demand , emul colonel cathcart ’ s harsh , self-right tone . “ won ’ t you give up your life for colonel cathcart and me ? ” yossarian tens with alert astonish when he heard colonel korn ’ s conclud word . “ what ’ s that ? ” he exclaim . “ what have you and colonel cathcart got to do with my countri ? you ’ re not the same. ” “ how can you separ us ? ” colonel korn inquir with iron tranquil . “ that ’ s right , ” colonel cathcart cri emphat . “ you ’ re either for us or against us . there ’ s no two way about it. ” “ i ’ m afraid he ’ s got you , ” ad colonel korn . “ you ’ re either for us or against your countri . it ’ s as simpl as that. ” “ oh , no , colonel . i don ’ t buy that. ” colonel korn wa unruf . “ neither do i , frankli , but everyon els will . so there you are. ” “ you ’ re a disgrac to your uniform ! ” colonel cathcart declar with bluster wrath , whirl to confront yossarian for the first time . “ i ’ d like to know how you ever got to be a captain , anyway. ” “ you promot him , ” colonel korn remind sweetli , stifl a snicker . “ don ’ t you rememb ? ” “ well , i never should have done it. ” “ i told you not to do it , ” colonel korn said . “ but you just wouldn ’ t listen to me. ” “ gee whiz , will you stop rub it in ? ” colonel cathcart cri . he furrow hi brow and glower at colonel korn through eye narrow with suspicion , hi fist clench on hi hip . “ say , whose side are you on , anyway ? ” “ your side , colonel . what other side could i be on ? ” “ then stop pick on me , will you ? get off my back , will you ? ” “ i ’ m on your side , colonel . i ’ m just load with patriotism. ” “ well , just make sure you don ’ t forget that. ” colonel cathcart turn away grudgingli after anoth moment , incomplet reassur , and began stride the floor , hi hand knead hi long cigarett holder . he jerk a thumb toward yossarian . “ let ’ s settl with him . i know what i ’ d like to do with him . i ’ d like to take him outsid and shoot him . that ’ s what i ’ d like to do with him . that ’ s what gener dreedl would do with him. ” “ but gener dreedl isn ’ t with us ani more , ” said colonel korn , “ so we can ’ t take him outsid and shoot him. ” now that hi moment of tension with colonel cathcart had pass , colonel korn relax again and resum kick softli against colonel cathcart ’ s desk . he return to yossarian . “ so we ’ re go to send you home instead . it took a bit of think , but we final work out thi horribl littl plan for send you home without caus too much dissatisfact among the friend you ’ ll leav behind . doesn ’ t that make you happi ? ” “ what kind of plan ? i ’ m not sure i ’ m go to like it. ” “ i know you ’ re not go to like it. ” colonel korn laugh , lock hi hand contentedli on top of hi head again . “ you ’ re go to loath it . it realli is odiou and certainli will offend your conscienc . but you ’ ll agre to it quickli enough . you ’ ll agre to it becaus it will send you home safe and sound in two week , and becaus you have no choic . it ’ s that or a court-marti . take it or leav it. ” yossarian snort . “ stop bluf , colonel . you can ’ t court-marti me for desert in the face of the enemi . it would make you look bad and you probabl couldn ’ t get a conviction. ” “ but we can court-marti you now for desert from duti , sinc you went to rome without a pass . and we could make it stick . if you think about it a minut , you ’ ll see that you ’ d leav us no altern . we can ’ t simpli let you keep walk around in open insubordin without punish you . all the other men would stop fli mission , too . no , you have my word for it . we will court-marti you if you turn our deal down , even though it would rais a lot of question and be a terribl black eye for colonel cathcart. ” colonel cathcart winc at the word “ black eye ” and , without ani appar premedit , hurl hi slender onyx-and-ivori cigarett holder down vicious on the wooden surfac on hi desk . “ jesu christ ! ” he shout unexpectedli . “ i hate thi goddam cigarett holder ! ” the cigarett holder bounc off the desk to the wall , ricochet across the window sill to the floor and came to a stop almost where he wa stand . colonel cathcart stare down at it with an irasc scowl . “ i wonder if it ’ s realli do me ani good. ” “ it ’ s a feather in your cap with gener peckem , but a black eye for you with gener scheisskopf , ” colonel korn inform him with a mischiev look of innoc . “ well , which one am i suppos to pleas ? ” “ both. ” “ how can i pleas them both ? they hate each other . how am i ever go to get a feather in my cap from gener scheisskopf without get a black eye from gener peckem ? ” “ march. ” “ yeah , march . that ’ s the onli way to pleas him . march . march. ” colonel cathcart grimac sullenli . “ some gener ! they ’ re a disgrac to their uniform . if peopl like those two can make gener , i don ’ t see how i can miss. ” “ you ’ re go to go far. ” colonel korn assur him with a flat lack of convict , and turn back chuckl to yossarian , hi disdain merriment increas at the sight of yossarian ’ s unyield express of antagon and distrust . “ and there you have the crux of the situat . colonel cathcart want to be a gener and i want to be a colonel , and that ’ s whi we have to send you home. ” “ whi doe he want to be a gener ? ” “ whi ? for the same reason that i want to be a colonel . what els have we got to do ? everyon teach us to aspir to higher thing . a gener is higher than a colonel , and a colonel is higher than a lieuten colonel . so we ’ re both aspir . and you know , yossarian , it ’ s a lucki thing for you that we are . your time on thi is absolut perfect , but i suppos you took that factor into account in your calculations. ” “ i haven ’ t been do ani calcul , ” yossarian retort . “ ye , i realli do enjoy the way you lie , ” colonel korn answer . “ won ’ t it make you proud to have your command offic promot to general-to know you serv in an outfit that averag more combat mission per person than ani other ? don ’ t you want to earn more unit citat and more oak leaf cluster for your air medal ? where ’ s your ‘ sprit de corp ? ’ don ’ t you want to contribut further to thi great record by fli more combat mission ? it ’ s your last chanc to answer yes. ” “ no. ” “ in that case , you have us over a barrel- “ said colonel korn without rancor . “ he ought to be asham of himself ! ” “ -and we have to send you home . just do a few littl thing for us , and- “ “ what sort of thing ? ” yossarian interrupt with belliger misgiv . “ oh , tini , insignific thing . realli , thi is a veri gener deal we ’ re make with you . we will issu order return you to the states-r , we will-and all you have to do in return is… ” “ what ? what must i do ? ” colonel korn laugh curtli . “ like us. ” yossarian blink . “ like you ? ” “ like us. ” “ like you ? ” “ that ’ s right , ” said colonel korn , nod , gratifi immeasur by yossarian ’ s guileless surpris and bewilder . “ like us . join us . be our pal . say nice thing about us here and back in the state . becom one of the boy . now , that isn ’ t ask too much , is it ? ” “ you just want me to like you ? is that all ? ” “ that ’ s all. ” “ that ’ s all ? ” “ just find it in your heart to like us. ” yossarian want to laugh confid when he saw with amaz that colonel korn wa tell the truth . “ that isn ’ t go to be too easi , ” he sneer . “ oh , it will be a lot easier than you think , ” colonel korn taunt in return , undismay by yossarian ’ s barb . “ you ’ ll be surpris at how easi you ’ ll find it to like us onc you begin. ” colonel korn hitch up the waist of hi loos , volumin trouser . the deep black groov isol hi squar chin from hi jowl were bent again in a kind of jeer and reprehens mirth . “ you see , yossarian , we ’ re go to put you on easi street . we ’ re go to promot you to major and even give you anoth medal . captain flume is alreadi work on glow press releas describ your valor over ferrara , your deep and abid loyalti to your outfit and your consumm dedic to duti . those phrase are all actual quotat , by the way . we ’ re go to glorifi you and send you home a hero , recal by the pentagon for moral and public-rel purpos . you ’ ll live like a millionair . everyon will lioniz you . you ’ ll have parad in your honor and make speech to rais money for war bond . a whole new world of luxuri await you onc you becom our pal . isn ’ t it love ? ” yossarian found himself listen intent to the fascin elucid of detail . “ i ’ m not sure i want to make speeches. ” “ then we ’ ll forget the speech . the import thing is what you say to peopl here. ” colonel korn lean forward earnestli , no longer smile . “ we don ’ t want ani of the men in the group to know that we ’ re send you home as a result of your refus to fli more mission . and we don ’ t want gener peckem or gener scheisskopf to get wind of ani friction between us , either . that ’ s whi we ’ re go to becom such good pals. ” “ what will i say to the men who ask me whi i refus to fli more mission ? ” “ tell them you had been inform in confid that you were be return to the state and that you were unwil to risk your life for anoth mission or two . just a minor disagr between pal , that ’ s all. ” “ will they believ it ? ” “ of cours they ’ ll believ it , onc they see what great friend we ’ ve becom and when they see the press releas and read the flatter thing you have to say about me and colonel cathcart . don ’ t worri about the men . they ’ ll be easi enough to disciplin and control when you ’ ve gone . it ’ s onli while you ’ re still here that they may prove troublesom . you know , one good appl can spoil the rest , ” colonel korn conclud with consciou ironi . “ you know-thi would realli be wonderful-y might even serv as an inspir to them to fli more missions. ” “ suppos i denounc you when i get back to the state ? ” “ after you ’ ve accept our medal and promot and all the fanfar ? no one would believ you , the armi wouldn ’ t let you , and whi in the world should you want to ? you ’ re go to be one of the boy , rememb ? you ’ ll enjoy a rich , reward , luxuri , privileg exist . you ’ d have to be a fool to throw it all away just for a moral principl , and you ’ re not a fool . is it a deal ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ it ’ s that or a court-martial. ” “ that ’ s a pretti scummi trick i ’ d be play on the men in the squadron , isn ’ t it ? ” “ odiou , ” colonel korn agre amiabl , and wait , watch yossarian patient with a glimmer of privat delight . “ but what the hell ! ” yossarian exclaim . “ if they don ’ t want to fli more mission , let them stand up and do someth about it the way i did . right ? ” “ of cours , ” said colonel korn . “ there ’ s no reason i have to risk my life for them , is there ? ” “ of cours not. ” yossarian arriv at hi decis with a swift grin . “ it ’ s a deal ! ” he announc jubilantli . “ great , ” said colonel korn with somewhat less cordial than yossarian had expect , and he slid himself off colonel cathcart ’ s desk to stand on the floor . he tug the fold of cloth of hi pant and undershort free from hi crotch and gave yossarian a limp hand to shake . “ welcom aboard. ” “ thank , colonel . i- “ “ call me blacki , john . we ’ re pal now. ” “ sure , blacki . my friend call me yo-yo . blacki , i- “ “ hi friend call him yo-yo , ” colonel korn sang out to colonel cathcart . “ whi don ’ t you congratul yo-yo on what a sensibl move he ’ s make ? ” “ that ’ s a real sensibl move you ’ re make , yo-yo , ” colonel cathcart said , pump yossarian ’ s hand with clumsi zeal . “ thank you , colonel , i- “ “ call him chuck , ” said colonel korn . “ sure , call me chuck , ” said colonel cathcart with a laugh that wa hearti and awkward . “ we ’ re all pal now. ” “ sure , chuck. ” “ exit smile , ” said colonel korn , hi hand on both their shoulder as the three of them move to the door . “ come on over for dinner with us some night , yo-yo , ” colonel cathcart invit hospit . “ how about tonight ? in the group dine room. ” “ i ’ d love to , sir. ” “ chuck , ” colonel korn correct reprovingli . “ i ’ m sorri , blacki . chuck . i can ’ t get use to it. ” “ that ’ s all right , pal. ” “ sure , pal. ” “ thank , pal. ” “ don ’ t mention it , pal. ” “ so long , pal. ” yossarian wave goodby fondli to hi new pal and saunter out onto the balconi corridor , almost burst into song the instant he wa alon . he wa home free : he had pull it off ; hi act of rebellion had succeed ; he wa safe , and he had noth to be asham of to anyon . he start toward the staircas with a jaunti and exhilar air . a privat in green fatigu salut him . yossarian return the salut happili , stare at the privat with curios . he look strang familiar . when yossarian return the salut , the privat in green fatigu turn suddenli into nate ’ s whore and lung at him murder with a bone-handl kitchen knife that caught him in the side below hi uprais arm . yossarian sank to the floor with a shriek , shut hi eye in overwhelm terror as he saw the girl lift the knife to strike at him again . he wa alreadi unconsci when colonel korn and colonel cathcart dash out of the offic and save hi life by frighten her away . 41 snowden “ cut , ” said a doctor . “ you cut , ” said anoth . “ no cut , ” said yossarian with a thick , unwieldi tongu . “ now look who ’ s but in , ” complain one of the doctor . “ anoth counti heard from . are we go to oper or aren ’ t we ? ” “ he doesn ’ t need an oper , ” complain the other . “ it ’ s a small wound . all we have to do is stop the bleed , clean it out and put a few stitch in. ” “ but i ’ ve never had a chanc to oper befor . which one is the scalpel ? is thi one the scalpel ? ” “ no , the other one is the scalpel . well , go ahead and cut alreadi if you ’ re go to . make the incision. ” “ like thi ? ” “ not there , you dope ! ” “ no incis , ” yossarian said , perceiv through the lift fog of insens that the two stranger were readi to begin cut him . “ anoth counti heard from , ” complain the first doctor sarcast . “ is he go to keep talk that way while i oper on him ? ” “ you can ’ t oper on him until i admit him , ” said a clerk . “ you can ’ t admit him until i clear him , ” said a fat , gruff colonel with a mustach and an enorm pink face that press down veri close to yossarian and radiat scorch heat like the bottom of a huge fri pan . “ where were you born ? ” the fat , gruff colonel remind yossarian of the fat , gruff colonel who had interrog the chaplain and found him guilti . yossarian stare up at him through a glassi film . the cloy scent of formaldehyd and alcohol sweeten the air . “ on a battlefield , ” he answer . “ no , no . in what state were you born ? ” “ in a state of innocence. ” “ no , no , you don ’ t understand. ” “ let me handl him , ” urg a hatchet-fac man with sunken acrimoni eye and a thin , malevol mouth . “ are you a smart aleck or someth ? ” he ask yossarian . “ he ’ s deliri , ” one of the doctor said . “ whi don ’ t you let us take him back insid and treat him ? ” “ leav him right here if he ’ s deliri . he might say someth incriminating. ” “ but he ’ s still bleed profus . can ’ t you see ? he might even die. ” “ good for him ! ” “ it would serv the finki bastard right , ” said the fat , gruff colonel . “ all right , john , let ’ s speak out . we want to get to the truth. ” “ everyon call me yo-yo. ” “ we want you to co-oper with us , yo-yo . we ’ re your friend and we want you to trust us . we ’ re here to help you . we ’ re not go to hurt you. ” “ let ’ s jab our thumb down insid hi wound and goug it , ” suggest the hatchet-fac man . yossarian let hi eye fall close and hope they would think he wa unconsci . “ he ’ s faint , ” he heard a doctor say . “ can ’ t we treat him now befor it ’ s too late ? he realli might die. ” “ all right , take him . i hope the bastard doe die. ” “ you can ’ t treat him until i admit him , ” the clerk said . yossarian play dead with hi eye shut while the clerk admit him by shuffl some paper , and then he wa roll away slowli into a stuffi , dark room with sear spotlight overhead in which the cloy smell of formaldehyd and sweet alcohol wa even stronger . the pleasant , permeat stink wa intox . he smell ether too and heard glass tinkl . he listen with secret , egotist mirth to the huski breath of the two doctor . it delight him that they thought he wa unconsci and did not know he wa listen . it all seem veri silli to him until one of the doctor said , “ well , do you think we should save hi life ? they might be sore at us if we do. ” “ let ’ s oper , ” said the other doctor . “ let ’ s cut him open and get to the insid of thing onc and for all . he keep complain about hi liver . hi liver look pretti small on thi x ray. ” “ that ’ s hi pancrea , you dope . thi is hi liver. ” “ no it isn ’ t . that ’ s hi heart . i ’ ll bet you a nickel thi is hi liver . i ’ m go to oper and find out . should i wash my hand first ? ” “ no oper , ” yossarian said , open hi eye and tri to sit up . “ anoth counti heard from , ” scof one of the doctor indignantli . “ can ’ t we make him shut up ? ” “ we could give him a total . the ether ’ s right here. ” “ no total , ” said yossarian . “ anoth counti heard from , ” said a doctor . “ let ’ s give him a total and knock him out . then we can do what we want with him. ” they gave yossarian total anesthesia and knock him out . he woke up thirsti in a privat room , drown in ether fume . colonel korn wa there at hi bedsid , wait calmli in a chair in hi baggi , wool , olive-drab shirt and trouser . a bland , phlegmat smile hung on hi brown face with it heavy-beard cheek , and he wa buf the facet of hi bald head gentli with the palm of both hand . he bent forward chuckl when yossarian awok , and assur him in the friendliest tone that the deal they had made wa still on if yossarian didn ’ t die . yossarian vomit , and colonel korn shot to hi feet at the first cough and fled in disgust , so it seem inde that there wa a silver line to everi cloud , yossarian reflect , as he drift back into a suffoc daze . a hand with sharp finger shook him awak roughli . he turn and open hi eye and saw a strang man with a mean face who curl hi lip at him in a spite scowl and brag , “ we ’ ve got your pal , buddi . we ’ ve got your pal. ” yossarian turn cold and faint and broke into a sweat . “ who ’ s my pal ? ” he ask when he saw the chaplain sit where colonel korn had been sit . “ mayb i ’ m your pal , ” the chaplain answer . but yossarian couldn ’ t hear him and close hi eye . someon gave him water to sip and tipto away . he slept and woke up feel great until he turn hi head to smile at the chaplain and saw aarfi there instead . yossarian moan instinct and screw hi face up with excruci irrit when aarfi chortl and ask how he wa feel . aarfi look puzzl when yossarian inquir whi he wa not in jail . yossarian shut hi eye to make him go away . when he open them , aarfi wa gone and the chaplain wa there . yossarian broke into laughter when he spi the chaplain ’ s cheer grin and ask him what in the hell he wa so happi about . “ i ’ m happi about you , ” the chaplain repli with excit candor and joy . “ i heard at group that you were veri serious injur and that you would have to be sent home if you live . colonel korn said your condit wa critic . but i ’ ve just learn from one of the doctor that your wound is realli a veri slight one and that you ’ ll probabl be abl to leav in a day or two . you ’ re in no danger . it isn ’ t bad at all. ” yossarian listen to the chaplain ’ s news with enorm relief . “ that ’ s good. ” “ ye , ” said the chaplain , a pink flush of impish pleasur creep into hi cheek . “ ye , that is good. ” yossarian laugh , recal hi first convers with the chaplain . “ you know , the first time i met you wa in the hospit . and now i ’ m in the hospit again . just about the onli time i see you late is in the hospit . where ’ ve you been keep yourself ? ” the chaplain shrug . “ i ’ ve been pray a lot , ” he confess . “ i tri to stay in my tent as much as i can , and i pray everi time sergeant whitcomb leav the area , so that he won ’ t catch me. ” “ doe it do ani good ? ” “ it take my mind off my troubl , ” the chaplain answer with anoth shrug . “ and it give me someth to do. ” “ well that ’ s good , then , isn ’ t it ? ” “ ye , ” agre the chaplain enthusiast , as though the idea had not occur to him befor . “ ye , i guess that is good. ” he bent forward impuls with awkward solicitud . “ yossarian , is there anyth i can do for you while you ’ re here , anyth i can get you ? ” yossarian teas him jovial . “ like toy , or candi , or chew gum ? ” the chaplain blush again , grin self-consci , and then turn veri respect . “ like book , perhap , or anyth at all . i wish there wa someth i could do to make you happi . you know , yossarian , we ’ re all veri proud of you. ” “ proud ? ” “ ye , of cours . for risk your life to stop that nazi assassin . it wa a veri nobl thing to do. ” “ what nazi assassin ? ” “ the one that came here to murder colonel cathcart and colonel korn . and you save them . he might have stab you to death as you grappl with him on the balconi . it ’ s a lucki thing you ’ re aliv ! ” yossarian snicker sardon when he understood . “ that wa no nazi assassin. ” “ certainli it wa . colonel korn said it was. ” “ that wa nate ’ s girl friend . and she wa after me , not colonel cathcart and colonel korn . she ’ s been tri to kill me ever sinc i broke the news to her that nate wa dead. ” “ but how could that be ? ” the chaplain protest in livid and resent confus . “ colonel cathcart and colonel korn both saw him as he ran away . the offici report say you stop a nazi assassin from kill them. ” “ don ’ t believ the offici report , ” yossarian advis dryli . “ it ’ s part of the deal. ” “ what deal ? ” “ the deal i made with colonel cathcart and colonel korn . they ’ ll let me go home a big hero if i say nice thing about them to everybodi and never critic them to anyon for make the rest of the men fli more missions. ” the chaplain wa appal and rose halfway out of hi chair . he bristl with bellicos dismay . “ but that ’ s terribl ! that ’ s a shame , scandal deal , isn ’ t it ? ” “ odiou , ” yossarian answer , stare up woodenli at the ceil with just the back of hi head rest on the pillow . “ i think ‘ odiou ’ is the word we decid on. ” “ then how could you agre to it ? ” “ it ’ s that or a court-marti , chaplain. ” “ oh , ” the chaplain exclaim with a look of stark remors , the back of hi hand cover hi mouth . he lower himself into hi chair uneasili . “ i shouldn ’ t have said anything. ” “ they ’ d lock me in prison with a bunch of criminals. ” “ of cours . you must do whatev you think is right , then. ” the chaplain nod to himself as though decid the argument and laps into embarrass silenc . “ don ’ t worri , ” yossarian said with a sorrow laugh after sever moment had pass . “ i ’ m not go to do it. ” “ but you must do it , ” the chaplain insist , bend forward with concern . “ realli , you must . i had no right to influenc you . i realli had no right to say anything. ” “ you didn ’ t influenc me. ” yossarian haul himself over onto hi side and shook hi head in solemn mockeri . “ christ , chaplain ! can you imagin that for a sin ? save colonel cathcart ’ s life ! that ’ s one crime i don ’ t want on my record. ” the chaplain return to the subject with caution . “ what will you do instead ? you can ’ t let them put you in prison. ” “ i ’ ll fli more mission . or mayb i realli will desert and let them catch me . they probabl would. ” “ and they ’ d put you in prison . you don ’ t want to go to prison. ” “ then i ’ ll just keep fli mission until the war end , i guess . some of us have to survive. ” “ but you might get killed. ” “ then i guess i won ’ t fli ani more missions. ” “ what will you do ? ” “ i don ’ t know. ” “ will you let them send you home ? ” “ i don ’ t know . is it hot out ? it ’ s veri warm in here. ” “ it ’ s veri cold out , ” the chaplain said . “ you know , ” yossarian rememb , “ a veri funni thing happened-mayb i dream it . i think a strang man came in here befor and told me he ’ s got my pal . i wonder if i imagin it. ” “ i don ’ t think you did , ” the chaplain inform him . “ you start to tell me about him when i drop in earlier. ” “ then he realli did say it . ‘ we ’ ve got your pal , buddi , ’ he said . ‘ we ’ ve got your pal. ’ he had the most malign manner i ever saw . i wonder who my pal is. ” “ i like to think that i ’ m your pal , yossarian , ” the chaplain said with humbl sincer . “ and they certainli have got me . they ’ ve got my number and they ’ ve got me under surveil , and they ’ ve got me right where they want me . that ’ s what they told me at my interrogation. ” “ no , i don ’ t think it ’ s you he meant , ” yossarian decid . “ i think it must be someon like nate or dunbar . you know , someon who wa kill in the war , like cleving , orr , dobb , kid sampson or mcwatt. ” yossarian emit a startl gasp and shook hi head . “ i just realiz it , ” he exclaim . “ they ’ ve got all my pal , haven ’ t they ? the onli one left are me and hungri joe. ” he tingl with dread as he saw the chaplain ’ s face go pale . “ chaplain , what is it ? ” “ hungri joe wa killed. ” “ god , no ! on a mission ? ” “ he die in hi sleep while have a dream . they found a cat on hi face. ” “ poor bastard , ” yossarian said , and began to cri , hide hi tear in the crook of hi shoulder . the chaplain left without say goodby . yossarian ate someth and went to sleep . a hand shook him awak in the middl of the night . he open hi eye and saw a thin , mean man in a patient ’ s bathrob and pajama who look at him with a nasti smirk and jeer . “ we ’ ve got your pal , buddi . we ’ ve got your pal. ” yossarian wa unnerv . “ what the hell are you talk about ? ” he plead in incipi panic . “ you ’ ll find out , buddi . you ’ ll find out. ” yossarian lung for hi tormentor ’ s throat with one hand , but the man glide out of reach effortlessli and vanish into the corridor with a malici laugh . yossarian lay there trembl with a pound puls . he wa bath in ici sweat . he wonder who hi pal wa . it wa dark in the hospit and perfectli quiet . he had no watch to tell him the time . he wa wide-awak , and he knew he wa a prison in one of those sleepless , bedridden night that would take an etern to dissolv into dawn . a throb chill ooz up hi leg . he wa cold , and he thought of snowden , who had never been hi pal but wa a vagu familiar kid who wa badli wound and freez to death in the puddl of harsh yellow sunlight splash into hi face through the side gunport when yossarian crawl into the rear section of the plane over the bomb bay after dobb had beseech him on the intercom to help the gunner , pleas help the gunner . yossarian ’ s stomach turn over when hi eye first beheld the macabr scene ; he wa absolut revolt , and he paus in fright a few moment befor descend , crouch on hi hand and knee in the narrow tunnel over the bomb bay besid the seal corrug carton contain the first-aid kit . snowden wa lie on hi back on the floor with hi leg stretch out , still burden cumbersom by hi flak suit , hi flak helmet , hi parachut har and hi mae west . not far away on the floor lay the small tail-gunn in a dead faint . the wound yossarian saw wa in the outsid of snowden ’ s thigh , as larg and deep as a footbal , it seem . it wa imposs to tell where the shred of hi satur coveral end and the rag flesh began . there wa no morphin in the first-aid kit , no protect for snowden against pain but the numb shock of the gape wound itself . the twelv syrett of morphin had been stolen from their case and replac by a cleanli letter note that said : “ what ’ s good for m amp ; m enterpris is good for the countri . milo minderbinder. ” yossarian swore at milo and held two aspirin out to ashen lip unabl to receiv them . but first he hastili drew a tourniquet around snowden ’ s thigh becaus he could not think what els to do in those first tumultu moment when hi sens were in turmoil , when he knew he must act compet at onc and fear he might go to piec complet . snowden watch him steadili , say noth . no arteri wa spurt , but yossarian pretend to absorb himself entir into the fashion of a tourniquet , becaus appli a tourniquet wa someth he did know how to do . he work with simul skill and composur , feel snowden ’ s lack-lust gaze rest upon him . he recov possess of himself befor the tourniquet wa finish and loosen it immedi to lessen the danger of gangren . hi mind wa clear now , and he knew how to proceed . he rummag through the first-aid kit for scissor . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden said softli . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ you ’ re go to be all right , kid , ” yossarian reassur him with a grin . “ you ’ re go to be all right. ” “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden said again in a frail , childlik voic . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” yossarian said , becaus he did not know what els to say . “ there , there. ” “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden whimper . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there . there , there. ” yossarian wa frighten and move more swiftli . he found a pair of scissor at last and began cut care through snowden ’ s coveral high up abov the wound , just below the groin . he cut through the heavi gabardin cloth all the way around the thigh in a straight line . the tini tailgunn woke up while yossarian wa cut with the scissor , saw him , and faint again . snowden roll hi head to the other side of hi neck in order to stare at yossarian more directli . a dim , sunken light glow in hi weak and listless eye . yossarian , puzzl , tri not to look at him . he began cut downward through the coveral along the insid seam . the yawn wound-wa that a tube of slimi bone he saw run deep insid the gori scarlet flow behind the twitch , startl fiber of weird muscl ? – wa drip blood in sever trickl , like snow melt on eav , but viscou and red , alreadi thicken as it drop . yossarian kept cut through the coveral to the bottom and peel open the sever leg of the garment . it fell to the floor with a plop , expos the hem of khaki undershort that were soak up blotch of blood on one side as though in thirst . yossarian wa stun at how waxen and ghastli snowden ’ s bare leg look , how loathsom , how lifeless and esoter the downi , fine , curl blond hair on hi odd white shin and calf . the wound , he saw now , wa not nearli as larg as a footbal , but as long and wide as hi hand and too raw and deep to see into clearli . the raw muscl insid twitch like live hamburg meat . a long sigh of relief escap slowli through yossarian ’ s mouth when he saw that snowden wa not in danger of die . the blood wa alreadi coagul insid the wound , and it wa simpli a matter of bandag him up and keep him calm until the plane land . he remov some packet of sulfanilamid from the first-aid kit . snowden quiver when yossarian press against him gentli to turn him up slightli on hi side . “ did i hurt you ? ” “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden whimper . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” yossarian said . “ there , there. ” “ i ’ m cold . i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there . there , there. ” “ it ’ s start to hurt me , ” snowden cri out suddenli with a plaintiv , urgent winc . yossarian scrambl frantic through the first-aid kit in search of morphin again and found onli milo ’ s note and a bottl of aspirin . he curs milo and held two aspirin tablet out to snowden . he had no water to offer . snowden reject the aspirin with an almost impercept shake of hi head . hi face wa pale and pasti . yossarian remov snowden ’ s flak helmet and lower hi head to the floor . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden moan with half-clos eye . “ i ’ m cold. ” the edg of hi mouth were turn blue . yossarian wa petrifi . he wonder whether to pull the rip cord of snowden ’ s parachut and cover him with the nylon fold . it wa veri warm in the plane . glanc up unexpectedli , snowden gave him a wan , co-op smile and shift the posit of hi hip a bit so that yossarian could begin salt the wound with sulfanilamid . yossarian work with renew confid and optim . the plane bounc hard insid an air pocket , and he rememb with a start that he had left hi own parachut up front in the nose . there wa noth to be done about that . he pour envelop after envelop of the white crystallin powder into the bloodi oval wound until noth red could be seen and then drew a deep , apprehens breath , steel himself with grit teeth as he touch hi bare hand to the dangl shred of dri flesh to tuck them up insid the wound . quickli he cover the whole wound with a larg cotton compress and jerk hi hand away . he smile nervous when hi brief ordeal had end . the actual contact with the dead flesh had not been nearli as repuls as he had anticip , and he found an excus to caress the wound with hi finger again and again to convinc himself of hi own courag . next he began bind the compress in place with a roll of gauz . the second time around snowden ’ s thigh with the bandag , he spot the small hole on the insid through which the piec of flak had enter , a round , crinkl wound the size of a quarter with blue edg and a black core insid where the blood had crust . yossarian sprinkl thi one with sulfanilamid too and continu unwind the gauz around snowden ’ s leg until the compress wa secur . then he snip off the roll with the scissor and slit the end down the center . he made the whole thing fast with a tidi squar knot . it wa a good bandag , he knew , and he sat back on hi heel with pride , wipe the perspir from hi brow , and grin at snowden with spontan friendli . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden moan . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ you ’ re go to be all right , kid , ” yossarian assur him , pat hi arm comfortingli . “ everyth ’ s under control. ” snowden shook hi head feebli . “ i ’ m cold , ” he repeat , with eye as dull and blind as stone . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” said yossarian , with grow doubt and trepid . “ there , there . in a littl while we ’ ll be back on the ground and doc daneeka will take care of you. ” but snowden kept shake hi head and point at last , with just the barest movement of hi chin , down toward hi armpit . yossarian bent forward to peer and saw a strang color stain seep through the coveral just abov the armhol of snowden ’ s flak suit . yossarian felt hi heart stop , then pound so violent he found it difficult to breath . snowden wa wound insid hi flak suit . yossarian rip open the snap of snowden ’ s flak suit and heard himself scream wildli as snowden ’ s insid slither down to the floor in a soggi pile and just kept drip out . a chunk of flak more than three inch big had shot into hi other side just underneath the arm and blast all the way through , draw whole mottl quart of snowden along with it through the gigant hole in hi rib it made as it blast out . yossarian scream a second time and squeez both hand over hi eye . hi teeth were chatter in horror . he forc himself to look again . here wa god ’ s plenti , all right , he thought bitterli as he stared-liv , lung , kidney , rib , stomach and bit of the stew tomato snowden had eaten that day for lunch . yossarian hate stew tomato and turn away dizzili and began to vomit , clutch hi burn throat . the tail gunner woke up while yossarian wa vomit , saw him , and faint again . yossarian wa limp with exhaust , pain and despair when he finish . he turn back weakli to snowden , whose breath had grown softer and more rapid , and whose face had grown paler . he wonder how in the world to begin to save him . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden whimper . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” yossarian mumbl mechan in a voic too low to be heard . “ there , there. ” yossarian wa cold , too , and shiver uncontrol . he felt goos pimpl clack all over him as he gaze down despond at the grim secret snowden had spill all over the messi floor . it wa easi to read the messag in hi entrail . man wa matter , that wa snowden ’ s secret . drop him out a window and he ’ ll fall . set fire to him and he ’ ll burn . buri him and he ’ ll rot , like other kind of garbag . the spirit gone , man is garbag . that wa snowden ’ s secret . ripe wa all . “ i ’ m cold , ” snowden said . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there , ” said yossarian . “ there , there. ” he pull the rip cord of snowden ’ s parachut and cover hi bodi with the white nylon sheet . “ i ’ m cold. ” “ there , there. ” 42 yossarian “ colonel korn say , ” said major danbi to yossarian with a prissi , gratifi smile , “ that the deal is still on . everyth is work out fine. ” “ no it isn ’ t. ” “ oh , ye , inde , ” major danbi insist benevol . “ in fact , everyth is much better . it wa realli a stroke of luck that you were almost murder by that girl . now the deal can go through perfectly. ” “ i ’ m not make ani deal with colonel korn. ” major danbi ’ s effervesc optim vanish instantli , and he broke out all at onc into a bubbl sweat . “ but you do have a deal with him , don ’ t you ? ” he ask in anguish puzzlement . “ don ’ t you have an agreement ? ” “ i ’ m break the agreement. ” “ but you shook hand on it , didn ’ t you ? you gave him your word as a gentleman. ” “ i ’ m break my word. ” “ oh , dear , ” sigh major danbi , and began dab ineffectu at hi careworn brow with a fold white handkerchief . “ but whi , yossarian ? it ’ s a veri good deal they ’ re offer you. ” “ it ’ s a lousi deal , danbi . it ’ s an odiou deal. ” “ oh , dear , ” major danbi fret , run hi bare hand over hi dark , wiri hair , which wa alreadi soak with perspir to the top of the thick , close-crop wave . “ oh dear. ” “ danbi , don ’ t you think it ’ s odiou ? ” major danbi ponder a moment . “ ye , i suppos it is odiou , ” he conced with reluct . hi globular , exophthalm eye were quit distraught . “ but whi did you make such a deal if you didn ’ t like it ? ” “ i did it in a moment of weak , ” yossarian wisecrack with glum ironi . “ i wa tri to save my life. ” “ don ’ t you want to save your life now ? ” “ that ’ s whi i won ’ t let them make me fli more missions. ” “ then let them send you home and you ’ ll be in no more danger. ” “ let them send me home becaus i flew more than fifti mission , ” yossarian said , “ and not becaus i wa stab by that girl , or becaus i ’ ve turn into such a stubborn son of a bitch. ” major danbi shook hi head emphat in sincer and bespectacl vexat . “ they ’ d have to send nearli everi man home if they did that . most of the men have more than fifti mission . colonel cathcart couldn ’ t possibl requisit so mani inexperienc replac crew at one time without caus an investig . he ’ s caught in hi own trap. ” “ that ’ s hi problem. ” “ no , no , no , yossarian , ” major danbi disagre solicit . “ it ’ s your problem . becaus if you don ’ t go through with the deal , they ’ re go to institut court-marti proceed as soon as you sign out of the hospital. ” yossarian thumb hi nose at major danbi and laugh with smug elat . “ the hell they will ! don ’ t lie to me , danbi . they wouldn ’ t even try. ” “ but whi wouldn ’ t they ? ” inquir major danbi , blink with astonish . “ becaus i ’ ve realli got them over a barrel now . there ’ s an offici report that say i wa stab by a nazi assassin tri to kill them . they ’ d certainli look silli tri to court-marti me after that. ” “ but , yossarian ! ” major danbi exclaim . “ there ’ s anoth offici report that say you were stab by an innoc girl in the cours of extens black-market oper involv act of sabotag and the sale of militari secret to the enemy. ” yossarian wa taken back sever with surpris and disappoint . “ anoth offici report ? ” “ yossarian , they can prepar as mani offici report as they want and choos whichev one they need on ani given occas . didn ’ t you know that ? ” “ oh , dear , ” yossarian murmur in heavi deject , the blood drain from hi face . “ oh , dear. ” major danbi press forward avidli with a look of vultur well-mean . “ yossarian , do what they want and let them send you home . it ’ s best for everyon that way. ” “ it ’ s best for cathcart , korn and me , not for everyone. ” “ for everyon , ” major danbi insist . “ it will solv the whole problem. ” “ is it best for the men in the group who will have to keep fli more mission ? ” major danbi flinch and turn hi face away uncomfort for a second . “ yossarian , ” he repli , “ it will help nobodi if you forc colonel cathcart to court-marti you and prove you guilti of all the crime with which you ’ ll be charg . you will go to prison for a long time , and your whole life will be ruined. ” yossarian listen to him with a grow feel of concern . “ what crime will they charg me with ? ” “ incompet over ferrara , insubordin , refus to engag the enemi in combat when order to do so , and desertion. ” yossarian suck hi cheek in soberli . “ they could charg me with all that , could they ? they gave me a medal for ferrara . how could they charg me with incompet now ? ” “ aarfi will swear that you and mcwatt lie in your offici report. ” “ i ’ ll bet the bastard would ! ” “ they will also find you guilti , ” major danbi recit , “ of rape , extens black-market oper , act of sabotag and the sale of militari secret to the enemy. ” “ how will they prove ani of that ? i never did a singl one of those things. ” “ but they have wit who will swear you did . they can get all the wit they need simpli by persuad them that destroy you is for the good of the countri . and in a way , it would be for the good of the country. ” “ in what way ? ” yossarian demand , rise up slowli on one elbow with bridl hostil . major danbi drew back a bit and began mop hi forehead again . “ well , yossarian , ” he began with an apologet stammer , “ it would not help the war effort to bring colonel cathcart and colonel korn into disreput now . let ’ s face it , yossarian-in spite of everyth , the group doe have a veri good record . if you were court-marti and found innoc , other men would probabl refus to fli mission , too . colonel cathcart would be in disgrac , and the militari effici of the unit might be destroy . so in that way it would be for the good of the countri to have you found guilti and put in prison , even though you are innocent. ” “ what a sweet way you have of put thing ! ” yossarian snap with caustic resent . major danbi turn red and squirm and squint uneasili . “ pleas don ’ t blame me , ” he plead with a look of anxiou integr . “ you know it ’ s not my fault . all i ’ m do is tri to look at thing object and arriv at a solut to a veri difficult situation. ” “ i didn ’ t creat the situation. ” “ but you can resolv it . and what els can you do ? you don ’ t want to fli more missions. ” “ i can run away. ” “ run away ? ” “ desert . take off i can turn my back on the whole damn mess and start running. ” major danbi wa shock . “ where to ? where could you go ? ” “ i could get to rome easili enough . and i could hide myself there. ” “ and live in danger everi minut of your life that they would find you ? no , no , no , no , yossarian . that would be a disastr and ignobl thing to do . run away from problem never solv them . pleas believ me . i am onli tri to help you. ” “ that ’ s what that kind detect said befor he decid to jab hi thumb into my wound , ” yossarian retort sarcast . “ i am not a detect , ” major danbi repli with indign , hi cheek flush again . “ i ’ m a univers professor with a highli develop sens of right and wrong , and i wouldn ’ t tri to deceiv you . i wouldn ’ t lie to anyone. ” “ what would you do if one of the men in the group ask you about thi convers ? ” “ i would lie to him. ” yossarian laugh mockingli , and major danbi , despit hi blush discomfort , lean back with relief , as though welcom the respit yossarian ’ s chang mood promis . yossarian gaze at him with a mixtur of reserv piti and contempt . he sat up in bed with hi back rest against the headboard , lit a cigarett , smile slightli with wri amus , and stare with whimsic sympathi at the vivid , pop-ey horror that had implant itself perman on major danbi ’ s face the day of the mission to avignon , when gener dreedl had order him taken outsid and shot . the startl wrinkl would alway remain , like deep black scar , and yossarian felt sorri for the gentl , moral , middle-ag idealist , as he felt sorri for so mani peopl whose shortcom were not larg and whose troubl were light . with deliber amiabl he said , “ danbi , how can you work along with peopl like cathcart and korn ? doesn ’ t it turn your stomach ? ” major danbi seem surpris by yossarian ’ s question . “ i do it to help my countri , ” he repli , as though the answer should have been obviou . “ colonel cathcart and colonel korn are my superior , and obey their order is the onli contribut i can make to the war effort . i work along with them becaus it ’ s my duti . and also , ” he ad in a much lower voic , drop hi eye , “ becaus i am not a veri aggress person. ” “ your countri doesn ’ t need your help ani more , ” yossarian reason with antagon . “ so all you ’ re do is help them. ” “ i tri not to think of that , ” major danbi admit frankli . “ but i tri to concentr on onli the big result and to forget that they are succeed , too . i tri to pretend that they are not significant. ” “ that ’ s my troubl , you know , ” yossarian muse sympathet , fold hi arm . “ between me and everi ideal i alway find scheisskopf , peckem , korn and cathcart . and that sort of chang the ideal. ” “ you must tri not to think of them , ” major danbi advis affirm . “ and you must never let them chang your valu . ideal are good , but peopl are sometim not so good . you must tri to look up at the big picture. ” yossarian reject the advic with a skeptic shake of hi head . “ when i look up , i see peopl cash in . i don ’ t see heaven or saint or angel . i see peopl cash in on everi decent impuls and everi human tragedy. ” “ but you must tri not to think of that , too , ” major danbi insist . “ and you must tri not to let it upset you. ” “ oh , it doesn ’ t realli upset me . what doe upset me , though , is that they think i ’ m a sucker . they think that they ’ re smart , and that the rest of us are dumb . and , you know , danbi , the thought occur to me right now , for the first time , that mayb they ’ re right. ” “ but you must tri not to think of that too , ” argu major danbi . “ you must think onli of the welfar of your countri and the digniti of man. ” “ yeah , ” said yossarian . “ i mean it , yossarian . thi is not world war one . you must never forget that we ’ re at war with aggressor who would not let either one of us live if they won. ” “ i know that , ” yossarian repli ters , with a sudden surg of scowl annoy . “ christ , danbi , i earn that medal i got , no matter what their reason were for give it to me . i ’ ve flown seventi goddam combat mission . don ’ t talk to me about fight to save my countri . i ’ ve been fight all along to save my countri . now i ’ m go to fight a littl to save myself . the countri ’ s not in danger ani more , but i am. ” “ the war ’ s not over yet . the german are drive toward antwerp. ” “ the german will be beaten in a few month . and japan will be beaten a few month after that . if i were to give up my life now , it wouldn ’ t be for my countri . it would be for cathcart and korn . so i ’ m turn my bombsight in for the durat . from now on i ’ m think onli of me. ” major danbi repli indulg with a superior smile , “ but , yossarian , suppos everyon felt that way. ” “ then i ’ d certainli be a damn fool to feel ani other way , wouldn ’ t i ? ” yossarian sat up straighter with a quizzic express . “ you know , i have a queer feel that i ’ ve been through thi exact convers befor with someon . it ’ s just like the chaplain ’ s sensat of have experienc everyth twice. ” “ the chaplain want you to let them send you home , ” major danbi remark . “ the chaplain can jump in the lake. ” “ oh , dear. ” major danbi sigh , shake hi head in regret disappoint . “ he ’ s afraid he might have influenc you. ” “ he didn ’ t influenc me . you know what i might do ? i might stay right here in thi hospit bed and veget . i could veget veri comfort right here and let other peopl make the decisions. ” “ you must make decis , ” major danbi disagre . “ a person can ’ t live like a vegetable. ” “ whi not ? ” a distant warm look enter major danbi ’ s eye . “ it must be nice to live like a veget , ” he conced wist . “ it ’ s lousi , ” answer yossarian . “ no , it must be veri pleasant to be free from all thi doubt and pressur , ” insist major danbi . “ i think i ’ d like to live like a veget and make no import decisions. ” “ what kind of veget , danbi ? ” “ a cucumb or a carrot. ” “ what kind of cucumb ? a good one or a bad one ? ” “ oh , a good one , of course. ” “ they ’ d cut you off in your prime and slice you up for a salad. ” major danbi ’ s face fell . “ a poor one , then. ” “ they ’ d let you rot and use you for fertil to help the good one grow. ” “ i guess i don ’ t want to live like a veget , then , ” said major danbi with a smile of sad resign . “ danbi , must i realli let them send me home ? ” yossarian inquir of him serious . major danbi shrug . “ it ’ s a way to save yourself. ” “ it ’ s a way to lose myself , danbi . you ought to know that. ” “ you could have lot of thing you want. ” “ i don ’ t want lot of thing i want , ” yossarian repli , and then beat hi fist down against the mattress in an outburst of rage and frustrat . “ goddammit , danbi ! i ’ ve got friend who were kill in thi war . i can ’ t make a deal now . get stab by that bitch wa the best thing that ever happen to me. ” “ would you rather go to jail ? ” “ would you let them send you home ? ” “ of cours i would ! ” major danbi declar with convict . “ certainli i would , ” he ad a few moment later , in a less posit manner . “ ye , i suppos i would let them send me home if i were in your place , ” he decid uncomfort , after laps into troubl contempl . then he threw hi face sideway disgustedli in a gestur of violent distress and blurt out , “ oh , ye , of cours i ’ d let them send me home ! but i ’ m such a terribl coward i couldn ’ t realli be in your place. ” “ but suppos you weren ’ t a coward ? ” yossarian demand , studi him close . “ suppos you did have the courag to defi somebodi ? ” “ then i wouldn ’ t let them send me home , ” major danbi vow emphat with vigor joy and enthusiasm . “ but i certainli wouldn ’ t let them court-marti me. ” “ would you fli more mission ? ” “ no , of cours not . that would be total capitul . and i might be killed. ” “ then you ’ d run away ? ” major danbi start to retort with proud spirit and came to an abrupt stop , hi half-open jaw swing close dumbl . he purs hi lip in a tire pout . “ i guess there just wouldn ’ t be ani hope for me , then , would there ? ” hi forehead and protuber white eyebal were soon glisten nervous again . he cross hi limp wrist in hi lap and hardli seem to be breath as he sat with hi gaze droop toward the floor in acquiesc defeat . dark , steep shadow slant in from the window . yossarian watch him solemnli , and neither of the two men stir at the rattl nois of a speed vehicl skid to a stop outsid and the sound of race footstep pound toward the build in hast . “ ye , there ’ s hope for you , ” yossarian rememb with a sluggish flow of inspir . “ milo might help you . he ’ s bigger than colonel cathcart , and he owe me a few favors. ” major danbi shook hi head and answer tonelessli . “ milo and colonel cathcart are pal now . he made colonel cathcart a vice-presid and promis him an import job after the war. ” “ then ex-p.f.c . wintergreen will help us , ” yossarian exclaim . “ he hate them both , and thi will infuri him. ” major danbi shook hi head bleakli again . “ milo and ex-p.f.c . wintergreen merg last week . they ’ re all partner now in m amp ; m enterprises. ” “ then there is no hope for us , is there ? ” “ no hope. ” “ no hope at all , is there ? ” “ no , no hope at all , ” major danbi conced . he look up after a while with a half-form notion . “ wouldn ’ t it be nice if they could disappear us the way they disappear the other and reliev us of all these crush burden ? ” yossarian said no . major danbi agre with a melancholi nod , lower hi eye again , and there wa no hope at all for either of them until footstep explod in the corridor suddenli and the chaplain , shout at the top of hi voic , came burst into the room with the electrifi news about orr , so overcom with hilari excit that he wa almost incoher for a minut or two . tear of great elat were sparkl in hi eye , and yossarian leap out of bed with an incredul yelp when he final understood . “ sweden ? ” he cri . “ orr ! ” cri the chaplain . “ orr ? ” cri yossarian . “ sweden ! ” cri the chaplain , shake hi head up and down with gleeful raptur and pranc about uncontrol from spot to spot in a grin , delici frenzi . “ it ’ s a miracl , i tell you ! a miracl ! i believ in god again . i realli do . wash ashor in sweden after so mani week at sea ! it ’ s a miracle. ” “ wash ashor , hell ! ” yossarian declar , jump all about also and roar in laugh exult at the wall , the ceil , the chaplain and major danbi . “ he didn ’ t wash ashor in sweden . he row there ! he row there , chaplain , he row there. ” “ row there ? ” “ he plan it that way ! he went to sweden deliberately. ” “ well , i don ’ t care ! ” the chaplain flung back with undiminish zeal . “ it ’ s still a miracl , a miracl of human intellig and human endur . look how much he accomplish ! ” the chaplain clutch hi head with both hand and doubl over in laughter . “ can ’ t you just pictur him ? ” he exclaim with amaz . “ can ’ t you just pictur him in that yellow raft , paddl through the strait of gibraltar at night with that tini littl blue oar- “ “ with that fish line trail out behind him , eat raw codfish all the way to sweden , and serv himself tea everi afternoon- “ “ i can just see him ! ” cri the chaplain , paus a moment in hi celebr to catch hi breath . “ it ’ s a miracl of human persever , i tell you . and that ’ s just what i ’ m go to do from now on ! i ’ m go to persever . ye , i ’ m go to persevere. ” “ he knew what he wa do everi step of the way ! ” yossarian rejoic , hold both fist aloft triumphantli as though hope to squeez revel from them . he spun to a stop face major danbi . “ danbi , you dope ! there is hope , after all . can ’ t you see ? even cleving might be aliv somewher in that cloud of hi , hide insid until it ’ s safe to come out. ” “ what are you talk about ? ” major danbi ask in confus . “ what are you both talk about ? ” “ bring me appl , danbi , and chestnut too . run , danbi , run . bring me crab appl and hors chestnut befor it ’ s too late , and get some for yourself. ” “ hors chestnut ? crab appl ? what in the world for ? ” “ to pop into our cheek , of course. ” yossarian threw hi arm up into the air in a gestur of mighti and despair selfrecrimin . “ oh , whi didn ’ t i listen to him ? whi wouldn ’ t i have some faith ? ” “ have you gone crazi ? ” major danbi demand with alarm and bewilder . “ yossarian , will you pleas tell me what you are talk about ? ” “ danbi , orr plan it that way . don ’ t you understand-h plan it that way from the begin . he even practic get shot down . he rehears for it on everi mission he flew . and i wouldn ’ t go with him ! oh , whi wouldn ’ t i listen ? he invit me along , and i wouldn ’ t go with him ! danbi , bring me buck teeth too , and a valv to fix and a look of stupid innoc that nobodi would ever suspect of ani clever . i ’ ll need them all . oh , whi wouldn ’ t i listen to him . now i understand what he wa tri to tell me . i even understand whi that girl wa hit him on the head with her shoe. ” “ whi ? ” inquir the chaplain sharpli . yossarian whirl and seiz the chaplain by the shirt front in an importun grip . “ chaplain , help me ! pleas help me . get my cloth . and hurri , will you ? i need them right away. ” the chaplain start away alertli . “ ye , yossarian , i will . but where are they ? how will i get them ? ” “ by bulli and browbeat anybodi who tri to stop you . chaplain , get me my uniform ! it ’ s around thi hospit somewher . for onc in your life , succeed at something. ” the chaplain straighten hi shoulder with determin and tighten hi jaw . “ don ’ t worri , yossarian . i ’ ll get your uniform . but whi wa that girl hit orr over the head with her shoe ? pleas tell me. ” “ becaus he wa pay her to , that ’ s whi ! but she wouldn ’ t hit him hard enough , so he had to row to sweden . chaplain , find me my uniform so i can get out of here . ask nurs duckett for it . she ’ ll help you . she ’ ll do anyth she can to be rid of me. ” “ where are you go ? ” major danbi ask apprehens when the chaplain had shot from the room . “ what are you go to do ? ” “ i ’ m go to run away , ” yossarian announc in an exuber , clear voic , alreadi tear open the button of hi pajama top . “ oh , no , ” major danbi groan , and began pat hi perspir face rapidli with the bare palm of both hand . “ you can ’ t run away . where can you run to ? where can you go ? ” “ to sweden. ” “ to sweden ? ” major danbi exclaim in astonish . “ you ’ re go to run to sweden ? are you crazi ? ” “ orr did it. ” “ oh , no , no , no , no , no , ” major danbi plead . “ no , yossarian , you ’ ll never get there . you can ’ t run away to sweden . you can ’ t even row. ” “ but i can get to rome if you ’ ll keep your mouth shut when you leav here and give me a chanc to catch a ride . will you do it ? ” “ but they ’ ll find you , ” major danbi argu desper , “ and bring you back and punish you even more severely. ” “ they ’ ll have to tri like hell to catch me thi time. ” “ they will tri like hell . and even if they don ’ t find you , what kind of way is that to live ? you ’ ll alway be alon . no one will ever be on your side , and you ’ ll alway live in danger of betrayal. ” “ i live that way now. ” “ but you can ’ t just turn your back on all your respons and run away from them , ” major danbi insist . “ it ’ s such a neg move . it ’ s escapist. ” yossarian laugh with buoyant scorn and shook hi head . “ i ’ m not run away from my respons . i ’ m run to them . there ’ s noth neg about run away to save my life . you know who the escapist are , don ’ t you , danbi ? not me and orr. ” “ chaplain , pleas talk to him , will you ? he ’ s desert . he want to run away to sweden. ” “ wonder ! ” cheer the chaplain , proudli throw on the bed a pillowcas full of yossarian ’ s cloth . “ run away to sweden , yossarian . and i ’ ll stay here and persever . ye . i ’ ll persever . i ’ ll nag and badger colonel cathcart and colonel korn everi time i see them . i ’ m not afraid . i ’ ll even pick on gener dreedle. ” “ gener dreedl ’ s out , ” yossarian remind , pull on hi trouser and hastili stuf the tail of hi shirt insid . “ it ’ s gener peckem now. ” the chaplain ’ s babbl confid did not falter for an instant . “ then i ’ ll pick on gener peckem , and even on gener scheisskopf . and do you know what els i ’ m go to do ? i ’ m go to punch captain black in the nose the veri next time i see him . ye , i ’ m go to punch him in the nose . i ’ ll do it when lot of peopl are around so that he may not have a chanc to hit me back. ” “ have you both gone crazi ? ” major danbi protest , hi bulg eye strain in their socket with tortur awe and exasper . “ have you both taken leav of your sens ? yossarian , listen- “ “ it ’ s a miracl , i tell you , ” the chaplain proclaim , seiz major danbi about the waist and danc him around with hi elbow extend for a waltz . “ a real miracl . if orr could row to sweden , then i can triumph over colonel cathcart and colonel korn , if onli i persevere. ” “ chaplain , will you pleas shut up ? ” major danbi entreat polit , pull free and pat hi perspir brow with a flutter motion . he bent toward yossarian , who wa reach for hi shoe . “ what about colonel- “ “ i couldn ’ t care less. ” “ but thi may actua- “ “ to hell with them both ! ” “ thi may actual help them , ” major danbi persist stubbornli . “ have you thought of that ? ” “ let the bastard thrive , for all i care , sinc i can ’ t do a thing to stop them but embarrass them by run away . i ’ ve got respons of my own now , danbi . i ’ ve got to get to sweden. ” “ you ’ ll never make it . it ’ s imposs . it ’ s almost a geograph imposs to get there from here. ” “ hell , danbi , i know that . but at least i ’ ll be tri . there ’ s a young kid in rome whose life i ’ d like to save if i can find her . i ’ ll take her to sweden with me if i can find her , so it isn ’ t all selfish , is it ? ” “ it ’ s absolut insan . your conscienc will never let you rest. ” “ god bless it. ” yossarian laugh . “ i wouldn ’ t want to live without strong misgiv . right , chaplain ? ” “ i ’ m go to punch captain black right in the nose the next time i see him , ” glori the chaplain , throw two left jab in the air and then a clumsi haymak . “ just like that. ” “ what about the disgrac ? ” demand major danbi . “ what disgrac ? i ’ m more in disgrac now. ” yossarian tie a hard knot in the second shoelac and sprang to hi feet . “ well , danbi , i ’ m readi . what do you say ? will you keep your mouth shut and let me catch a ride ? ” major danbi regard yossarian in silenc , with a strang , sad smile . he had stop sweat and seem absolut calm . “ what would you do if i did tri to stop you ? ” he ask with rueful mockeri . “ beat me up ? ” yossarian react to the question with hurt surpris . “ no , of cours not . whi do you say that ? ” “ i will beat you up , ” boast the chaplain , danc up veri close to major danbi and shadowbox . “ you and captain black , and mayb even corpor whitcomb . wouldn ’ t it be wonder if i found i didn ’ t have to be afraid of corpor whitcomb ani more ? ” “ are you go to stop me ? ” yossarian ask major danbi , and gaze at him steadili . major danbi skip away from the chaplain and hesit a moment longer . “ no , of cours not ! ” he blurt out , and suddenli wa wave both arm toward the door in a gestur of exuber urgenc . “ of cours i won ’ t stop you . go , for god sake , and hurri ! do you need ani money ? ” “ i have some money. ” “ well , here ’ s some more. ” with fervent , excit enthusiasm , major danbi press a thick wad of italian currenc upon yossarian and clasp hi hand in both hi own , as much to still hi own trembl finger as to give encourag to yossarian . “ it must be nice to be in sweden now , ” he observ yearningli . “ the girl are so sweet . and the peopl are so advanced. ” “ goodby , yossarian , ” the chaplain call . “ and good luck . i ’ ll stay here and persever , and we ’ ll meet again when the fight stops. ” “ so long , chaplain . thank , danby. ” “ how do you feel , yossarian ? ” “ fine . no , i ’ m veri frightened. ” “ that ’ s good , ” said major danbi . “ it prove you ’ re still aliv . it won ’ t be fun. ” yossarian start out . “ ye it will. ” “ i mean it , yossarian . you ’ ll have to keep on your toe everi minut of everi day . they ’ ll bend heaven and earth to catch you. ” “ i ’ ll keep on my toe everi minute. ” “ you ’ ll have to jump. ” “ i ’ ll jump. ” “ jump ! ” major danbi cri . yossarian jump . nate ’ s whore wa hide just outsid the door . the knife came down , miss him by inch , and he took off . the end appendix joseph heller ’ s prefac to the 1994 edit of catch-22 in 1961 , the new york time wa a newspap with eight column . and on novemb 11 of that year , one day after the offici public date of catch-22 , the page with the book review carri an unusu advertis that ran from top to bottom and wa five column wide . to the eye the effect wa stupend . the book review that day , of a work by somebodi els , wa squeez asid to the fold of the page , as were the crossword puzzl and all els . the ad had thi caption : what ’ s the catch ? and display at the top in silhouett wa the comic cartoon of a uniform figur in flight , glanc off to the side at some unspecifi danger with an express of panic . it wa an announc ad for catch-22 . interwoven with the text were mention of prais from twenty-on individu and group of some public stand , most connect to literatur and the publish world , who had receiv the novel befor public and had alreadi review it or comment about it favor . within day after public , there wa a review in the nation by nelson algren ( a client of my own literari agent , who had urg him to read it ) , who wrote of catch-22 that it “ wa the best novel to come out of anywher in year ” . and there wa a review by stud terkel in a chicago daili newspap that recommend it about as highli . so much attent to the work at public wa in larg part the result of the industri zeal and appreci of my literari agent , candida donadio , and my editor , robert gottlieb , and i embrac the opportun afford now to dedic thi new edit to both of them , as colleagu and alli with talent that were of immeasur valu . the work wa not review in the time on public . howev , it wa review in the herald tribun by mauric dolbier , and mr. dolbier said of it : “ a wild , move , shock , hilari , rage , exhilar , giant roller-coast of a book. ” that the review for the herald tribun came to review at all thi war novel by someon unknown wa almost entir the product of coincid . s. j. perelman , much better known and the subject of an interview by mr. dolbier , wa publish hi own book at just about that time . hi publish wa simon amp ; schuster , mine too , and the editor in charg of hi work there wa also the same , bob gottlieb . in answer to a question put to him by dolbier about hi own read , mr. perelman repli that he wa veri much engross in a novel press upon him by hi editor , a novel call catch-22 . return to hi offic , mr. dolbier later confess to me , he found the book alreadi in a pile with other he had decid he would not have time to studi as prospect to write about . had it not been for gottlieb , there would have been no perelman , and had it not been for perelman , there would have been no review by dolbier . and had it not been for dolbier , there might not have been the time . two week afterward , and probabl onli becaus of mr. dolbier , the book wa describ with approb in the daili time by the review orvil prescott , who predict it would not be forgotten by those who could take it and call it : “ a dazzl perform that will outrag nearli as mani reader as it delights. ” the rest , one might say is histori , but it is a histori easili misconstru . the novel won no prize and wa not on ani bestsel list . and , as mr. prescott foresaw , for just about everi good report , there seem to appear one that wa neg . look back at thi novel after twenty-f year , john aldridg , to my mind the most percept and persist comment of american literatur over the decad , laud robert brustein for hi superbl intellig review in the new republ , which contain “ essenti argument that much of the later critic ha done littl to improv on ” , and mr. aldridg recognis that mani in the earli audienc of catch-22 “ like the book for just the reason that caus other to hate it ” . the disparag were frequent venom . in the sunday time , in a notic in back so slender that the onli peopl see it were those await it , the review ( a novelist who also by chanc wa a client of my own agent , candida ) decid that the “ novel gasp for want of craft and sensibl ” , “ is repetiti and monoton ” , “ fail ” , “ is an emot hodgepodg ” , and wa no novel ; and in the esteem the new yorker , the review , a staff writer who normal write about jazz , compar the book unfavor with a novel of similar set by mitchel goodman and decid that catch-22 “ doesn ’ t even seem to have been written ; instead , it give the impress of have been shout onto paper ” , “ what remain is a debri of sour joke ” , and that in the end heller “ wallow in hi own laughter and final drown in it ” . ( i am tempt now to drown in laughter as i jot thi down . ) i do not recal that the novel wa includ in the sever hundr book in the christma roundup of recommend read of the time that year or in the sever hundr other pick out in the spring for summer read . but in late summer of 1962 , raymond walter , on the bestsel page of the sunday time , which then carri regularli the column “ in and out of book ” , report that the underground book new yorker seem to be talk about most wa catch-22 . ( the novel probabl wa more heavili advertis than ani other that year , but it wa still underground . ) not that much later , newsweek carri a stori to the same effect in a space more than a page wide . and late that same summer , i wa invit to my first televis interview . the program wa the today show , then a varieti show as much as anyth els . the interim host wa john chancellor . mr. chancellor had recent return from hi newsman ’ s post in the kremlin , and he had agre to accept the posit on condit that he interview onli those peopl he himself chose to . after the show , in a bar close by the studio in which i found myself drink martini at an earlier hour than ever in my life , he hand me a packet of sticker he ’ d had print privat . they read : yossarian live . and he confid he ’ d been past these sticker secretli on the wall of the corridor and in the execut rest room of the nbc build . then came septemb and the paperback edit and with it , final , an expans in popular appeal that seem to take the publish , dell , by surpris , despit elabor promot and distribut strategi . it seem for a while that the peopl there could not fulli bring themselv to believ the sale figur and that they would never catch up . paperback publish print in the hundr of thousand . for thi , after an initi releas of 300,000 copi , they went back to press five more time between septemb and the end of the year , twice each in octob and decemb , and by the end of 1963 , there were eleven print . in england , under the auspic of the enterpris young editor , there tom maschler , it wa that way from the start . bestsel list were new and rudimentari then , but catch-22 wa quickli at the head of them . for me the histori of catch-22 begin back in 1953 , when i start write it . in 1953 , i wa employ as a copywrit at a small advertis agenc in new york , after two year as an instructor in english composit at pennsylvania state univers , which wa then a colleg . earli on , in anxiou need of an approv opinion , i sent the open chapter off to the literari agent i had manag to obtain after publish a few short stori in magazin , in esquir and the atlant . the agent were not impress , but a young assist there , ms. candida donadio , wa , and she secur permiss to submit that chapter to a few public that regularli publish excerpt from “ novel in progress ” . in 1955 the chapter appear in a paperback quarterli , new world write ( an antholog that also contain , under a pseudonym , an extract from anoth novel in progress-jack kerouac ’ s on the road ) . there came complimentari letter of interest from a few editor at establish book publish , and i wa encourag to continu with a work i now saw realist wa go to take me a good mani year longer than i at first had guess . in 1957 , when i had about 270 page in typescript , i wa employ at time magazin , write advertising-sal present by day when not furtiv put thought down on paper for my work on the novel at home that even . and candida donadio wa establish herself as a pre-emin agent in her own right , with a list of american author as client as impress as ani . we agre it made sens to submit the partial manuscript to some publish , mainli to obtain a practic idea of the potenti for public of the novel we both thought so much of . she wa drawn toward a new young editor she knew of at simon amp ; schuster , one she thought might prove more recept to innov than most . hi name wa robert gottlieb , and she wa right . while gottlieb busi himself with those page , i , with a four-week summer vacat from bounti time magazin , began rewrit them . gottlieb and i met for lunch , mainli for him to gaug my tempera and ascertain how amen i would be as an author to work with . after i listen to him allud with tact to certain broad suggest he thought he eventu might be compel to make , i hand him my new page with the boast respons that i had alreadi taken care of nearli all of them . he surpris me with concern that i might take except to work with someon so young-h wa twenty-six , i think , and i wa thirty-four . i wa more greatli surpris to learn from him later that both he and hi closest colleagu at simon amp ; schuster , nina bourn , were intimid at first by an air of suspicion i project that i did not know i even possess . i have not been suspici of him sinc , and i doubt veri much that gottlieb , who went on to becom the head of alfr a. knopf and then the editor of the new yorker magazin , ha ever again been intimid by anybodi . and what i still rememb most agreeabl about him is that he did not ask for an outlin or onc seek for even a hint of where thi one-third of a novel he ’ d seen wa go to go . the contract i receiv call for an advanc of fifteen hundr dollar , half on sign , which i did not need , and the remaind on complet and accept . probabl , i wa hi first novelist , but not hi first to be publish ; other author with complet manuscript came to him in the three more year i need to finish mine . probabl , i wa candida ’ s earliest client too . both were as delight as i wa with the eventu success of catch-22 , and the three of us have been revel in our recollect of the experi ever sinc . on februari 28 , 1962 , the journalist richard starn publish a column of unrestrain prais in hi newspap , the new york world-telegram , that open with these word : “ yossarian will , i think , live a veri long time. ” hi tribut wa unexpect , becaus mr. starn wa a newspaperman in the hard-boil mode whose customari beat wa local polit , and the world-telegram wa wide regard as gener conserv . to thi day i am grate to mr. starn for hi unqualifi and unsolicit approv and bless him for the accuraci of hi predict . yossarian ha inde live a long time . mr. starn ha pass on . mani peopl mention in that first advertis have die , and most of the rest of us are on the way . but yossarian is aliv when the novel end . becaus of the motion pictur , even close reader of the novel have a final , last imag of him at sea , paddl toward freedom in a yellow inflat lifeboat . in the book he doesn ’ t get that far ; but he is not captur and he isn ’ t dead . at the end of the successor volum i ’ ve just complet , close time ( that flee cartoon figur is again on the book jacket of the american edit , but wear a businessman ’ s chapeau and move with a cane ) , he is again still aliv , more than forti year older but definit still there . “ everyon ha got to go , ” hi physician friend in that novel remind him with emphasi . “ everyon ! ” but should i ever write anoth sequel , he would still be around at the end . sooner or later , i must conced , yossarian , now seventi , will have to pass away too . but it won ’ t be by my hand . joseph heller , 1994 east hampton , new york